          Vol. 16 (2022), pp. 32-78http://nflrc.hawaii.edu/ldc/http://hdl.handle.net/10125/74670Revised Version Received: 08 Nov 2021 Two decades of sign language and gesture research in Australia: 2000.2020Jennifer GreenThe University of MelbourneGabrielle HodgeUniversity College LondonAustralian National UniversityBarbara F. KellyThe University of MelbourneIn this article, we provide an overview of the last twenty years of research on Indig.enous sign languages, deaf community sign languages, co-speech gesture, and multi.modal communication in the Australian context. From a global perspective, research on sign languages and on the gestures that normally accompany speech has been used as the basis for exploring different aspects of linguistic theory. Such research informs debates about the nature of the human language capacity and questions as to whether the diverse range of languages we see in the world share some universal patterns of organisation. We outline some of the theoretical and methodological achievements of scholars working in these interconnected disciplines in Australia, highlight the value of corpus-based approaches to linguistic research, draw attention to research on multimodality in the verbal arts, and discuss community-oriented re.search outputs guided by collaborative research practices. The article is accompanied by an on-line and editable bibliography of well over 300 publications that is acces.sible to researchers and others working in these related fields.1. Introduction  Australia is home to a rich and diverse range of communicative practices, some arguably among the oldest expressions of continuous languages and culture in the world, and others the consequence of successive waves of new languages brought to the continent by colonists and immigrants. This article pro.vides an overview of the directions that research on Australian Indigenous sign languages, Auslan, and gesture have taken over a two-decade time span, between 2000 and 2020.11 We acknowledge support provided by the Australian Research Council (DE160100873), the Centre of Excellence for the Dynamics of Language (CoEDL) (CE140100041), and the UK Arts and Humanities Research Council (AH/N00924X/1). Many thanks to the Auslan research community for checking two decades of references. We thank Trevor Johnston and three anonymous reviewers for their constructive feedback and the editors of LD&C for their support. We also thank Eleanor Jorgensen and Rui Yam.awaki for their editorial assistance.  Scholars working in this field have built on foundational research from the twentieth century but also have extended it in new ways. In part, this has been enabled by increasingly affordable technologies that have transformed the ways that we record, document, and analyse human interaction and commu.nication. Video-recording devices have become part of the fieldwork kit of many linguists (Seyfeddinipur 2012; Meakins et al. 2018). The software ELAN (Witten.berg et al. 2006), developed at the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics in Nijmegen, was first released in 2000 and is now favoured by many researchers of sign and gesture. While such technological changes quickly get taken for granted, many of the opportunities they afford for fine-grained analyses would have been unimaginable to previous generations.One of the milestones in this Australian collaborative process was a workshop on issues in Australian ¡®nonverbal¡¯ language research held in 2011 at the Austra.lian Linguistics Society conference in Canberra. The workshop examined a range of issues in research on gesture, sign languages, and, more generally, multimodal communication. It brought researchers working on gesture and sign together with the goal of identifying common ground across differing theoretical perspectives and research domains. It was, in fact, the first time that Auslan (the most wide.spread deaf community sign language used in Australia), Australian Indigenous sign languages, and gesture specialists had engaged in a forum of this kind, and it resulted in a special edition of the Australian Journal of Linguistics (Green et al. 2014). This was the first issue of the journal to include articles on both Auslan and on Australian Indigenous sign languages, and some of the collaborations that were seeded in that workshop have continued.While our focus is on sign and gesture, the approach taken in this overview article is implicitly multimodal and, to some degree, reflects our own theoretical perspectives, where we regard the communicative resources at hand as part of the overall ¡°semiotic plurality of communication¡± (Ferrara & Hodge 2018).22 As the term multimodal may be employed to refer to a broad range of phenomena, it is beyond the scope of this review to include all recent research on multimodal communication in the Australian context.  Thus, we do not countenance a strict demarcation between ¡®sign¡¯ and ¡®gesture,¡¯ nor do we seek to sequester modes from each other when we consider face-to-face communi.cation in human interaction (see, e.g., Kendon 2008a; Enfield 2009). However, for convenience, the article is divided into six main sections. We begin with an over.view of recent research on Australian Indigenous sign languages (¡ì2). We follow with a review of Auslan-related research during the past twenty years (¡ì3). This section covers research describing Auslan lexicogrammar and use, signed language interpreting and translation practices, deaf education and language teaching, lan.guage and community concerns, and theoretical contributions to signed language linguistics. In ¡ì4, we look at research on gesture, and then, in ¡ì5, we discuss Aus.tralian research on sign, gesture, and technology. In the final section (¡ì6), we draw together some of the threads that these research areas have in common and point to particular issues that may inform research agendas in the future. A list of the publications that this review is based on is provided at the end of this article, along with a link to the Australian Sign & Gesture Reference Library (Hodge et al. 2021). This online reference library, with a permanent DOI, is a dynamic resource that can be updated as new research in this broad, energetic, and cross-disciplinary field comes to light.33 We have done our best to provide a comprehensive overview of relevant research on sign and gesture conducted over the last twenty years. Our time frame includes publications that appear (or are in press) before mid-2021. We apologise for any omissions and welcome new additions to the online reference library (please contact the second author). 2. Australian Indigenous sign languages   Sign languages are an important and val.ued part of the traditions of Australian Indigenous peoples.44 In this article, we use the term Indigenous to refer to Australian Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. See https://aiatsis.gov.au/explore/australias-first-peoples (accessed 2021-02-22). These sign languages, used as an alternative to speech when speech is either impractical or inappropriate, have been termed alternate sign languages by Adam Kendon, a pioneer of research on Australian Indigenous sign languages ([1988] 2013) as well as on gesture (2004). Australian Indigenous sign languages vary in terms of their complexity and their relationship to the spoken languages of the communities where they are found. One of their features is that they are not generally the main mode of communication, but rather used alongside other semiotic systems, including speech, gesture, and drawing practices. Reflecting on the state of the field, Kendon (2015) concluded that one of the reasons that these sign languages are of theoretical interest is precisely because of their close relationship to speech.In everyday conversation, sign is used for particular cultural and pragmatic rea.sons. Sign is used in certain gender-restricted ceremonies and in other situations where speaking is disallowed; when hunting (in the desert regions of Australia be.cause speaking could scare off prey and in the far north because making a noise might attract crocodiles); to communicate in noisy environments when speech would not be heard; and for communication between interlocutors who are visible to each other yet out of earshot. Using sign may signal the circumspection required of certain topics, and sign is one of the resources drawn upon to mark respect. In some com.munities, sign is used instead of speech by particular kin in the context of bereave.ment or ¡°sorry business.¡± Some of the most developed of these Indigenous sign lan.guages are found in regions such as Central Australia and Western Cape York, where speech taboos extended through such periods of mourning (Kendon [1988] 2013). In everyday contexts, sign provides a means of conducting discreet and private side conversations when using speech is not desired or could be regarded as impolite. Sign may also be employed for specific medical reasons (like aphasia) when a person has trouble speaking. For elderly people who lose their hearing or speech, sign can become the most useful communicative resource available to them in later life.The exact number of Australian Indigenous sign languages, informed either by archival records or by comparative investigations of contemporary knowledge and practice, remains an open question. Scholars of these sign languages and their com.munities of use have varying approaches, particularly when it comes to formalising names for sign varieties. While everyday use of a limited set of signs is commonplace, detailed knowledge of the extended repertoires of these sign languages is highly en.dangered. This is partly due to age- and gender-related aspects of sign use and the ways that sign is associated with cultural practices that are changing rapidly. After several decades of relative research inactivity following the publication of Kendon¡¯s seminal work, Sign Languages of Aboriginal Australia, originally published in 1988 but reprinted in 2013, interest in the Indigenous sign languages of Australia has undergone a revival. Overviews of the less-recent history of research on Australian Indigenous sign languages and observations about gesture use in Australia can be found in Kendon (1988) 2013 and 2008b.2.1  Documenting sign diversity   Between 1978 and 1986, Kendon¡¯s fieldwork on Australian Indigenous sign languages was concentrated in Central Australia and particularly in the communities of Yuendumu (Warlpiri), Ti Tree (Anmatyerr), Tara (Kaytetye), Tennant Creek (Warumungu and Warlmanpa), and Elliott (Mudburra and Jingulu). Kendon referred to this broad region as the North Central Desert. In terms of ¡°sign language development,¡± he concluded that this area was ¡°somewhat distinct¡± (Kendon [1988] 2013: 31.32). The original recordings, archived at the Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies (AIATSIS), com.prise more than fifty hours of material.55 Kendon¡¯s collections can be found at https://aiatsis.gov.au/collections/using-collection/search-collection (call numbers KENDON_A001-A008; accessed 2018-05-04).In the last two decades, the geographical focus has been extended, with work on Yol.u Sign Language (YSL) from northeast Arnhem Land (Maypilama & Adone 2012; Maypilama et al. 2012; Maypilama & Adone 2013; Adone & Maypilama 2014a; 2014b; Bauer 2014; Adone & Maypilama 2015; James et al. 2020b) and investigations of sign used in the north-central Arnhem Land community of Manin.grida (Green et al. 2018; Green 2019; Green et al. 2020). A team of researchers in.vestigated colour signs in YSL (Adone et al. 2012). New research has been conducted in Balgo and in the Western Desert (Lempert 2018; Ellis et al. 2019; Jorgensen 2020), in Kalkaringi (Green et al. 2017), and in Elliott (Green et al. 2019). In addition, long-term collaborations between linguists and the Batchelor Institute have resulted in ex.tensive documentation of the signing traditions of the Anmatyerr, Warlpiri, Kaytetye, Arrernte, and Alyawarr peoples from Central Australia. These research materials add to and augment Kendon¡¯s original work by broadening the geographic range and by providing perspectives on sign knowledge, three decades on. Although most of this research focusses on the signing practices of hearing signers, some are begin.ning to investigate the shared repertoires of hearing and deaf signers in Indigenous communities, particularly in northeast Arnhem Land and in Kalkaringi.  2.2  Creating searchable corpora, online and other community resources, and col.laborative research practices    One of the objectives of this research has been to en.gage collaboratively with communities and work with Indigenous people and organ.isations to make resources that support knowledge of sign, guided by principles of ethical engagement that are core to Australian research practice (Meakins et al. 2018: 28.29; AIATSIS 2020; Gaby & Woods 2020; James et al. 2020a). Some examples of the products of this research include posters with QR code links to demonstrations of signs (Green et al. 2017; Green et al. 2020) and the Mudburra dictionary, which contains a substantial sign section covering 170 signs, making it the first Indigenous spoken-language dictionary to include hand signs (Green et al. 2019: 397.434). An illustrated handbook of YSL from northeast Arnhem Land includes 500 of the most frequently used signs and describes some aspects of the grammar, vocabulary, and structure (James et al. 2020b). Other forms of community engagement and public dissemination of research results, such as the broadcast of edited sign language films on community platforms such as ICTV (Indigenous Community Television), aim to heighten public awareness of these sign languages.66 See https://ictv.com.au/video/item/6213 (accessed 2020-05-13). In some cases, records of sign made many decades ago have been accessed from archives and annotated in ELAN (Wittenberg et al. 2006) to make them searchable and more accessible to communi.ties and researchers.Another example of a community resource is the sign website and dictionary titled iltyem-iltyem, which is now hosted by the Batchelor Institute (Green et al. 2011; Campbell et al. [2013] 2021; Carew & Green 2015).77 See http://iltyemiltyem.com (accessed 2021-07-04). In the processes of de.signing a workflow that moved from making field recordings of sign in several Aus.tralian languages (Anmatyerr, Warlpiri, Ngaanyatjarra, and some others) to adding sign clips to the website, the researchers were informed and inspired by guidelines developed for the annotation of corpora of deaf community sign languages such as Auslan (see ¡ì3.3).2.3 Forms and features of Australian Indigenous sign languages    The first fine-grained description of the articulatory features of any Australian Indigenous sign language was Kendon¡¯s (1988) 2013 work on sign from the North Central Desert. Jorgensen (2020) provides a detailed description of the structure of signs used in Balgo (Western Desert) by applying a phonological model developed from analyses of deaf community sign languages. There are partial descriptions of sign action, usu.ally focussed on handshapes, in signing communities in other parts of the Western Desert and in Arnhem Land (Adone & Maypilama 2014a; Bauer 2014; Green et al. 2018; Ellis et al. 2019; James et al. 2020b). A comparison of some features of sign articulation between three language groups (Warlpiri, Kukatja, and YSL) is found in Jorgensen et al. 2021, and an analysis of the use of the ¡°horns¡± handshape in Austra.lian Indigenous sign is found in Green 2021a. 2.4 The use of alternate sign by Indigenous deaf people   In some remote com.munities, Australian Indigenous sign languages are used by both deaf and hearing people (Maypilama & Adone 2013; Bauer 2014; Adone & Maypilama 2015; James et al. 2020b). This provides a context where traditional sign, widely used gestural practices (¡ì4), and Auslan (¡ì3) may all come together. While a small proportion of the Indigenous population is deaf from birth, varying degrees of hearing loss are widespread. This may result from otitis media (forms of inflammation and infec.tion of the middle ear) or from age-related hearing deterioration. As is the case for Indigenous populations globally (Coleman et al. 2018), for many years, high rates of hearing loss have been reported for Indigenous Australians and with this can come various degrees of social disadvantage (Howard 2007; Butcher 2015; Australian Indigenous HealthInfoNet 2019; DeLacy et al. 2020). Bone et al. (2021) consider the impact of colonisation on Indigenous and deaf peoples in Australia and Canada. Adams & Crowe (2019: 6) suggest that respect for linguistic diversity, including sign, may have positive impacts on the well-being of deaf people in Indigenous com.munities, although they acknowledge that ¡°the benefits of Indigenous sign language use have rarely been investigated.¡± As Arrernte elder and language expert Margaret Kemarre Turner (OAM) put it, speaking from Mparntwe/Alice Springs in the heart of Australia, ¡°[sign language] is the sacredness of the hand. It¡¯s part of respect. When people use sign their spirit feels well¡± (Green 2021b: 24).Recent research has begun to examine some dimensions of shared communicative practices in Indigenous communities where there is a minority deaf population (Saxton-Barney 2010; Power 2013; Green et al. 2017). In the community of Kalkaringi in the Victoria River region of northern Australia, semiotic resources are borrowed and incorporated into the local communicative ecology if, and when, they fit a purpose. One of the resources that entered into local repertoires was a version of Auslan fingerspelling, learned from the pages of a telephone directory by Indigenous mothers keen to assist their deaf children in the context of local education. There are other examples of contact between different sign languages . Indigenous deaf people in far north Queensland use a sign system that they claim is derived from both Australian Aboriginal (mainland) and Torres Strait Islander sign languages (Jackson 2015).2.5 Sign as part of multimodal practice in the verbal arts    Some researchers have looked at the way sign works together with sand drawing, a dynamic and ephem.eral narrative practice perfected by women and girls in some desert communities of Australia (Munn [1973] 2016; Wilkins [1997] 2016; Green 2014a; 2014b; Green & Wilkins 2014; 2015; Green 2016; Ellis et al. 2017). In a study of Arandic sand stories, Green (2010; 2014a) developed innovative means for collecting video re.cordings, both spontaneous and structured, in a remote fieldwork environment. This multimodal study of women¡¯s sand stories, which incorporate speech, song, sign, gesture, and drawing, shows how the expressive elements used in the stories are orchestrated in unison, reflecting both language use and cultural practice. Some of this research has pioneered the use of new technologies and devices (e.g., iPads) in the narration of stories that combine speech and drawing (Green & Kral 2020; Kral et al. 2020). Other research draws attention to several previously undescribed aspects of sign systems. For example, the articulation of some signs may be ¡°modified¡± in commu.nicative contexts that require particular levels of respect, such as when sign is used to communicate about kin relations who are avoided for cultural reasons (Green 2019). There are other actions in this domain of respect, for example the ¡°elbow¡± action used in some communities in Arnhem Land (Green 2019; Green et al. 2020; James et al. 2020b) and the ¡°forearm-holding¡± action used in Arnhem Land as well as in Murrinhpatha communities. Blythe (2012) applies the theoretical framework and methods of conversation analysis to look at the way this Murrinhpatha fore.arm-holding passing-gesture is used and the way its meanings can be manipulated in the context of an episode of teasing. These studies raise the complex topic of local ideologies about which types of communicative action are regarded as ¡°sign¡± and which are seen as ¡°gesture.¡±3. Auslan    In this section, we differentiate between research that empirically de.scribes the lexicogrammar of Auslan and research on other aspects of Auslan. It must first be acknowledged that even after twenty years of effort, descriptive work on Auslan has deliberately prioritised analysis of data from deaf people who learned Auslan from birth or early childhood. A central aim of Auslan language description has been to identify Auslan signing benchmarks based on deaf signers who have ex.perienced relatively uninterrupted and intergenerational signed language acquisition, in order to support the development of empirically informed language resources for deaf education, as well as interpreting and teaching signed language.Less than 3% of profoundly deaf children in Australia are born to parents who can sign (Johnston 2006c). Most deaf children do not have a community of signers around them from a young age and must instead actively seek connections with oth.er signers, during or after transition to adulthood. Consequently, the possibilities for many deaf people to achieve maximal Auslan repertoires are often severely compro.mised. In many cases, deaf children are still denied access to language during early childhood and therefore experience language deprivation, with lifelong communica.tive, social, and economic consequences (see Hall 2017). Most deaf signers also tend to live in urban centres close to services for improving communication access and social participation, such as deaf societies with qualified Auslan/English interpreters and community support workers. However, a significant number live in regional or remote areas and are therefore more isolated with respect to social networks with other signers. Auslan is also influenced by high numbers of both deaf and hearing ¡°new¡± signers who have learned Auslan much later in life (see de Meulder 2019). These factors all affect possibilities for a ¡°standardised¡± form of Auslan (Johnston 2003). As linguists have repeatedly cautioned, everyday signing used by the majority of signers in the deaf community is therefore much more diverse than descriptions of Auslan based on people signing from birth or early childhood. We do not yet know much about how Auslan is used by Indigenous signers (¡ì2.4), migrants, or refugees; about variation due to deafblindness and other sensory experiences; or about the effects of childhood language deprivation on signing deaf people¡¯s communication. However, researchers have investigated the situations and needs of deaf people from migrant backgrounds living in Victoria (Willoughby 2008); the overall distri.bution of signers in New South Wales (Willoughby 2009d), Tasmania (Willoughby 2009e), and Victoria (Willoughby 2013); general education and employment out.comes for Victorian signed language users (Willoughby 2009a); and whether signed language users¡¯ education and employment levels are on par with the general Aus.tralian population (Willoughby 2011b). Aged care support for deaf and hard-of-hearing Victorians (Willoughby 2011a) and barriers to quality care for signing deaf people in residential aged care facilities (Willoughby 2014) have also been inves.tigated. There have also been studies relating to funding support for deaf people, including a review of the smoke alarm subsidy scheme for deaf and hard-of-hearing Victorians (Willoughby 2009c), and a wider investigation of the economic impact and cost of hearing loss in Australia (Access Economics 2006). More broadly, the history of Australian deaf communities and Auslan has also been examined. These studies encompass the colonial era (Carty & Thornton 2011), the lives of important deaf leaders (Carty 2000; Thornton et al. 2014), the history of the Western Australian Deaf Society (Bontempo & Hodgetts 2002), the role of deaf women in deaf communities (Hoopman 2011), the role of correspondence for deaf people (Anderson & Carty 2014), and the history of deaf citizens¡¯ groups and other community affairs in the early twentieth century (Carty 2016; 2018). More recently, researchers have described common barriers to effective participation in the health care system experienced by deaf people (Beaver & Carty 2021).3.1 Auslan lexicogrammar    There are approximately forty-five publications involv.ing empirical descriptions of Auslan lexicogrammar as used by signers who learned Auslan from birth and early childhood, including six doctoral dissertations. These outputs all make observations about the structure and use of Auslan as a result of original fieldwork, elicitation, experimentation, and/or corpus analysis. Trevor John.ston is the sole or co-author on thirty-six of these publications, including his own dissertation (Johnston 1989b). He also officially or unofficially supervised the five other doctoral dissertations of this type (Schembri 2002; de Beuzeville 2006; Ferrara 2012; Gray 2013; Hodge 2014). Following the creation of the first Auslan dictionary (Johnston 1987) and the pioneering efforts of Johnston (1989a; 1989b), early descriptive work focussed on lexical description and understanding sociolinguistic variation across this cohort of Auslan signers. Specifically, researchers have questioned how lexemes are defined in a sign language (Johnston & Schembri 1999) and investigated the identification and analysis of noun and verb pairs (Johnston 2001a), verb modification or agreement (Schembri 2002; 2003; Schembri et al. 2005), issues with language standardisation and dictionaries (Johnston 2003), sociolinguistic variation in the use of fingerspell.ing (Schembri & Johnston 2007), and the place of articulation, or lowering of signs (Schembri et al. 2006). The acquisition of depicting signs (also known as ¡°classifier¡± constructions) by signing children was also investigated and compared with the visu.al drawing development of nonsigning hearing children (de Beuzeville 2004; 2006). These studies all supported the first textbook introduction to signed language linguistics developed for Auslan teachers, interpreters, linguists, and other practi.tioners (Johnston & Schembri 2007a). Researchers then investigated processes of lexicalisation (Johnston & Schembri 2010), including idiom constructions (Johnston & Ferrara 2012) and lexical frequency (Johnston 2012). They also described issues with lexical gaps in Auslan in applied contexts, such as medical interpreting (Major, Napier, Ferrara, & Johnston 2012). Others studied how the now-endangered Aus.tralian.Irish Sign Language evolved alongside Auslan as a minority signed language used by early Catholic deaf communities in Australia (Adam 2016b; see also Wallis 2016, who offers a history of her deaf Catholic family and their use of this language). The documentation and ongoing development of the Auslan Corpus (Johnston 2008c) and Auslan Signbank (Johnston & Cassidy 2008) enabled deeper empirical description of aspects of Auslan lexicogrammar based on this cohort of deaf signers. These resources also supported opportunities to test prior claims about signed lan.guages made on the basis of data from very small numbers of signers. These include a study of the ways to teach signed discourse cohesion and reference within story texts (Cresdee 2006); an analysis of the meaningful use of space with indicating verbs (de Beuzeville et al. 2009); the presence or omission of ¡°subject¡± or ¡°topic¡± arguments (McKee et al. 2011); the use and role of depicting signs in Auslan (Ferrara 2012); the formational and functional characteristics of pointing signs (Johnston 2013a); the aspectual modification of verbs (Gray 2013); and the perfective grammaticalisa.tion of the sign finish (Johnston et al. 2015). Others have investigated the use of English mouthings and conventionalisation of mouth actions (Johnston et al. 2016); backchanneling strategies used by signers (Nekrasova 2017); the role of headshak.ing for doing clause negation (Johnston 2018); and how signers coordinate different semiotic strategies to do reference (Hodge et al. 2019). Other studies have described Auslan clause structure, the expression of clause arguments and predicates via different semiotic strategies, and different strategies for linking clauses (Johnston et al. 2007; Ferrara & Johnston 2014; Hodge 2014; Hodge & Johnston 2014). Researchers have also explored how corpus-based research can inform the teaching of Auslan (Cresdee & Johnston 2014). More recently, corpus description has shed light on the question of real or assumed grammatical relations in Auslan (Johnston 2019a). Building on an earlier analysis of the use of ¡°role shift¡± in Auslan (Goswell 2011), researchers have also used the Auslan Corpus to describe how signers use enactment for functional, creative, and performative effect (Ferrara & Johnston 2014; Hodge & Ferrara 2014) and considered how enactment can be incorporated into the reported speech literature (Hodge & Cormier 2019).3.2 Tactile signed language practices    More recently, researchers have started investigating tactile Auslan practices used by deafblind signers. These studies have taken an interactional and discourse analysis approach to analysing tactile signed language use, focussing on describing how misunderstanding and repair are done (Willoughby et al. 2014), how humour is communicated in conversations between deafblind signers (Willoughby et al. 2019), and how people who are born deaf and lose their sight later in life go about adapting visual Auslan for tactile delivery and reception (Willoughby et al. 2020). These researchers have also contributed an over.view of tactile signed languages (Willoughby et al. 2018) and addressed some meth.odological issues with how tactile signed interactions can be analysed (Iwasaki et al. 2019). 3.3 Auslan Signbank and Auslan Corpus development    Early foundations for Aus.lan documentation and corpus development were laid with lexicography projects and the development of the Auslan dictionary and CD-ROM in the early 1990s (Johnston 1987; 1997a; 1997b; 2001b; Johnston & Schembri 2003). Early testing of how language description could be achieved through creation of a digital lan.guage archive and corpus (Johnston & Schembri 2006; 2007b) paved the way for the development of the Auslan Signbank (Johnston & Cassidy 2008) and the Auslan Corpus of deaf signers from five cities in Australia who learned Auslan from birth or early childhood (Johnston 2008c). The Auslan Signbank was also later enriched with the Auslan Medical Signbank, which aimed to bring deaf people and linguists together for language planning led by Auslan signers (Johnston & Napier 2010; Napier et al. 2015). Issues of language ownership in relation to language planning efforts and possibilities for standardisation were also discussed (Adam 2015b; see also Johnston 2003).Researchers have since pioneered methods for processing signed language cor.pus data and ensuring the development of digital archives into machine-readable corpora, particularly with respect to tokenisation and lemmatisation processes (Johnston 2008a; 2008b; Cassidy & Johnston 2009; Johnston 2009; 2010a; 2010b; 2014). Australian researchers and their international collaborators have also written about signed language documentation and corpus approaches to signed language research more generally, inspiring many other signed language corpus projects in other countries (Johnston & Schembri 2013; Fenlon et al. 2015). More recently, researchers have documented and archived a directly comparable corpus of Auslan and the ambient spoken language Australian English, to facilitate holistic comparisons of the face-to-face communication of deaf signers and non.signing hearing speakers (Hodge et al. 2018; Hodge et al. 2019). Along the way, signed language corpus development has also been enabled by creating very specific and precise annotation guidelines (Johnston & van Roekel 2014; Johnston 2019b), further considering what building and using signed language corpora can do for us (Kuder et al. 2018), and identifying best practices for annotating signed language corpora in general (Hodge & Crasborn, 2022). 3.4 Interpreting     Research into Auslan/English interpreting includes descriptions and analyses of general interpreting theories and practices, particularly within the courts and health care contexts, as well as experimental investigations of simultane.ous interpreting cognition. Research into Auslan/English interpreting practices and theory was initiated by comparing Auslan and BSL (British Sign Language) interpret.ing (Napier & Adam 2002), understanding who works as professional interpreters in Australia (Napier & Barker 2003), interrogating the existing interpreter code of ethics (Leneham & Napier 2003), and exploring linguistic coping strategies (Napier 2002a; 2005a; 2007; 2016) and omissions produced by Auslan interpreters (Napier 2003; 2004a; Napier & Barker 2004b; Napier 2005c). Early research also looked at linguistic issues in Auslan interpreting in university contexts (Napier 2002b) and how deaf students can access university education via signed language interpreting (Napier & Barker 2004a). Researchers have also examined perceptions of signed language interpreter competencies (Bontempo 2005; Napier et al. 2005; Napier & Rohan 2007; Na.pier 2011a), compared interpreter competencies with deaf signers (Napier 2006a), and investigated interpreter training, testing, and accreditation possibilities (Napier 2004b; 2005b; 2005d; Bontempo & Napier 2007; Bontempo & Hutchinson 2011). Practitioner researchers (i.e., signers who work across applied as well as academic and research contexts) have explored the professionalisation of signed language in.terpreters (Bontempo 2013; Napier & Goswell 2013) and deaf interpreters in Aus.tralia (Bontempo et al. 2014). More recently, researchers have commenced cross-linguistic comparisons of how interpreters use communication practices such as fingerspelling (Nicodemus et al. 2017), as well as the strategies deaf leaders have developed for working with signed language interpreters (Goswell et al. 2008; Napier et al. 2008; Haug et al. 2017). Practitioner researchers have united interpreter theory and practice (Napier et al. 2006; 2010; Adam & Stone 2011; Napier 2011b; Bontempo 2015; 2016; Napier & Leeson 2016; Napiet et al. 2018) and described interpreter education and men.toring practices (Napier 2006b; 2006c; 2006d; Bontempo & Levitzke-Gray 2009; Bontempo & Napier 2009; Nelson et al. 2009; Napier 2010; Pearce & Napier 2010; Judd et al. 2013). In particular, the development and benefits of self-reflective prac.tices have been highlighted (Goswell 2012; Judd 2015; Dangerfield & Napier 2016). Researchers have investigated interpreter dispositions (Bontempo, Napier, Hayes, & Brashear 2014) and the role of personality and emotional stability as a predictor of interpreter competence and aptitude (Bontempo & Napier 2011; Bon.tempo 2012; Bontempo & Napier 2014). The role of multilingualism and language-brokering skills for developing signed language interpreter expertise has also been outlined (Napier 2017). Experimental research on signed language interpreting has focussed on evaluat.ing the efficacy of simultaneous interpreting, mainly by investigating and compar.ing the bilingual working memory capacity of interpreters and deaf signers (Wang & Napier 2013) and the relationship between working memory capacity and si.multaneous interpreting performance (Wang 2013a; 2013b; 2016). This has led to deeper understandings of the cognition of simultaneous interpreting, including what strategies are involved and what quality can be achieved (Wang 2020; 2021). These researchers have also investigated directionality in signed language interpreting and how to measure working memory (Wang & Napier 2014; 2015). They have also designed rubrics to assess signed language interpreting performance (Wang et al. 2015). 3.5 Interpreting in legal and health care contexts     Research about Auslan inter.preting in the courts was initiated by the debate about whether deaf people have the right to serve as jurors in Australia (Napier & McEwin 2015; Spencer, San Roque, Hale, & Napier 2017) or if their exclusion constitutes a breach of human rights (Spencer, San Roque, Napier, & Hale 2017). Researchers have explored how deaf signers can potentially participate in the jury process (Napier & Spencer 2007; 2008; Napier et al. 2019), such as through professional signed language interpreters (Hale et al. 2018) or the testing of direct versus interpreter-mediated comprehension of jury instructions (Napier & Spencer 2017). Researchers have also investigated the working conditions, perceptions, roles, and responsibilities of signed language interpreters in court (Hale & Napier 2016; Napier & Banna 2016) and the training of legal interpreters who work with deaf jurors (Napier et al., in press). The feasibility and assessment of remote video signed language interpreting in legal contexts has also been explored (Napier & Leneham 2011; Napier 2012a; 2012b; 2013). Many deaf people in Australia also face significant barriers to accessing health care information (Napier & Kidd 2013; Napier & Sabolcec 2014). Research about Auslan interpreting in health care contexts has described the challenges of mental health interpreting (Cornes & Napier 2005) and the dynamic roles that interpreters undertake when working with health care professionals (Napier & Cornes 2004; Major & Napier 2019). Researchers have examined how nonsigning nurses describe health care procedures (Major & Holmes 2008) and how a Medical Signbank may support health care interpreting practices (Napier et al. 2011). Researcher practitio.ners have also analysed how to clarify and ensure accuracy of information in these contexts (Major & Napier 2013; Major 2014), how to use authentic interactions in discourse training for health care interpreters (Major, Napier, & Stubbe 2012), and how to avoid the risk of vicarious trauma in health care settings (Bontempo & Malcolm 2012). 3.6 Translation research     Early translation research has investigated ways to create effective educational resources for children (Conlon & Napier 2004) and how to ap.ply existing translation approaches and methodologies to the translation of written English into Auslan (Bridge 2009). The model of the signed language interpreter as translator (Leneham 2005) and the dynamics of power and ethnocentrism in signed language translation were also explored (Leneham 2007). The role of deaf transla.tors in the deaf community has since been illuminated (Adam et al. 2011). Research.ers have also investigated the quality of English-into-Auslan translations available online (Hodge et al. 2015b) and developed technical guidelines for improving the production of signed language translations (Hodge et al. 2015a). This research has supported deeper interrogation of what signing diversity and translanguaging prac.tices mean for the development of effective Auslan translations for deaf signing audi.ences (Hodge & Goswell 2021). 3.7 Learning Auslan    Teaching Auslan as an additional language is a booming industry in Australia, but research into teaching practices and processes is limited. For example, only one review of Auslan training and delivery in one state has been undertaken (Willoughby 2012b). Researchers have considered an action research process for teaching signed language to parents of deaf children (Napier et al. 2007), analysed errors and feedback in beginner Auslan classrooms (Willoughby et al. 2015), and investigated what hearing students of Auslan are doing outside of the classroom to support their learning (Willoughby & Sell 2019). More recently, the National Australian Curriculum for Auslan has been published (ACARA 2016). Our understanding of language development and signed language assessment for diverse deaf children also remains limited, and it is a hugely challenging area. One doctoral thesis examines debates about deaf education and signed language from 1970 to 2000 (Dillon 2015). Researchers have investigated principles and prac.tices of literacy development for deaf signers (Power & Leigh 2000; Power et al. 2008), the modes of communication of children with cochlear implants and the role of signed language in their lives (Hyde & Punch 2011), young deaf people¡¯s use of the World Wide Web (Matthews et al. 2010), and the impact of signed versus written questionnaires on deaf adolescent psychopathology (Cornes et al. 2006). Research.ers have also examined language choices and heritage language maintenance in mi.grant families with deaf children (Willoughby 2009b; 2012a), the pressing issues faced by deaf children and young people from refugee backgrounds (Willoughby 2015a), and the role of professional advice in shaping language choices in migrant-background families with deaf children (Willoughby 2015b). Johnston (2004) tested and analysed the signed language proficiency of signing children in a bilingual Auslan/English education program. The acquisition of depict.ing signs by signing children was also investigated and compared with the visual drawing development of nonsigning hearing children (de Beuzeville 2004; 2006). There is only one standardised assessment tool (i.e., normed on data from deaf chil.dren who have acquired sign since birth or early childhood) available for assessing some deaf children¡¯s receptive and productive Auslan skills (Herman et al. 2014). There is also one unpublished report summarising early intervention strategies used in primary schools that offer Auslan to deaf children in Victoria (Hodge et al. 2013). 3.8 Theoretical contributions     There are many other Auslan-related publications that summarise or recontextualise observations previously made elsewhere, yet the new knowledge is either a new theoretical framework and/or reinterpretation of already observed and published phenomena. This includes publications on the ethics of deafness and deaf people¡¯s human rights, language contact and the sociolinguistics of signed languages, and the semiotics of signed languages and linguistic theory.Researchers have written about several aspects of the ethics of deafness, includ.ing the cultural construction of deaf people as disabled (Branson & Miller 2005); the ethics of deaf people wishing to have deaf children of their own (Johnston 2005); the future of the deaf community given advances in genetics and population decline (Carty 2006; Johnston 2006a; 2006c); the ethics of cochlear implantation and the rights of deaf children and their families (Sparrow 2005; Hyde & Power 2006); and issues with policies and funding for genetic testing for deafness that result from medical approaches to deafness and disability (Sparrow 2010).Other publications have discussed the integration of fully conventionalised with less conventionalised semiotic strategies in Auslan and other signed languages. Early theoretical work considered the application of Systemic Functional Grammar to Auslan as a way to address this integration (Johnston 1996), and analysed ¡°classifier predicate¡± constructions as visual representations rather than linguistic structures (Cogill-Koez 2000a; 2000b). Claims about signed language morphology based on the morphology of spoken languages were also tested and challenged (Schembri et al. 2002; Johnston 2006b). More recently, linguists have turned to semiotic approaches for analysing signed language use, in part to support better comparison with other face-to-face communication practices (Johnston 2013b; Ferrara & Hodge 2018). In the majority of published articles, the age, nature, and size of the signing com.munity have been cited repeatedly as important factors influencing the shape and evolution of Auslan. Researchers have discussed signed language bilingualism and language contact (Adam 2012; Quinto-Pozos & Adam 2013; 2015; Adam 2016a; Quinto-Pozos & Adam 2020) and language variation and change in signed lan.guages (Schembri & Johnston 2012; 2013; Bayley et al. 2015). The sociolinguistics of signed languages has been extensively discussed in relation to Auslan and related signed languages such as BSL and NZSL (New Zealand Sign Language), focusing on cohorts of deaf people who have acquired sign from birth or early childhood (Cormier et al. 2008; Schembri et al. 2009; Schembri et al. 2010). This work has con.tributed to broader sociolinguistic understandings of deaf communities (Schembri & Lucas 2015). More recently, researchers are looking beyond traditional sociolinguis.tics into the translanguaging literature to better understand the full extent of signing diversity in Australia, especially signing variation resulting from early childhood lan.guage deprivation and the fact that most signers learn Auslan during or after transi.tion to adulthood (Hodge & Goswell 2021). Researchers have also considered how corpus linguistics and linguistic ethnography methods may be combined (Hodge & Goico 2022). Diversity across signed and spoken languages (Cormier et al. 2013), implications for language universals (Cormier et al. 2010), and sociolinguistic typology (Schembri et al. 2018) have been discussed. Researchers have also considered the dissemination and transfer of knowledge to the deaf community (Adam 2015a) and investigated the local ideologies of communication practices used with and around deaf signers during an artistic collaboration (Hodge 2020).4. Gesture     The many and varied relationships between sign and gesture have been a central topic in studies of multimodal communication, including several recent articles that address questions of the similarities and differences between various co-speech gesture and signing practices (e.g., Kendon 2008a; Johnston 2013b; Vigliocco et al. 2014; Goldin-Meadow & Brentari 2017; Ferrara & Hodge 2018; see M¨¹ller 2018 for a recent overview). Delineating the differences between ¡°sign¡± and ¡°ges.ture¡± remains a complex issue, although primarily one that occupies linguists rather than speakers or signers of these languages. As Kendon (2004: 98) has written, it is important to recognise ¡°that ¡®gesture¡¯ is a term that covers a multitude of diverse activities.¡± In the Australian Indigenous context, local communities may be agnostic as to the difference and simply refer to both ¡°sign¡± and ¡°gesture¡± as ¡°action.¡± Avoid.ing terminologies that have become somewhat outdated and too proscriptive in their connotations, and paying attention to the metalanguages used by communities to delineate their communicative practices, is part of the tool kit employed in the mo.mentum to move forward. Underlying this, however, are serious empirical questions as to what kinds of ¡°action¡± resources are deployed, what their purposes are, and how they are combined with other semiotic resources found in local ecologies of communication. Such considerations have been central to work in Australia, with researchers from these domains coming together for the 2011 workshop mentioned in ¡ì1. The inaugural meeting of the International Society of Gesture Studies (ISGS), held in 2002 in Austin, Texas, brought together an expanding community of scholars studying gesture and nonverbal communication across varied disciplines, methods, and theories. Several Australian researchers presented papers on a broad range of topics. Barbara Kelly presented on infant gesture development. Maurice Nevile gave a paper focussing on gesture in the airline cockpit, a study that is unlikely to be replicated since the data were collected prior to the 9/11 terror attacks (see Nevile 2002). Alexis Tabensky gave a paper on the gestures of foreign language speakers (see Tabensky 2002). These broad-ranging papers in linguistics and related fields are indicative of the types of subsequent gesture research being carried out in the Australian context. In focussing on Australian gesture studies here, our discussion will highlight work on Australian English and on Australian Indigenous languages. In the following sections, we draw attention to research across five main areas, some of which intersect: language, cognition, and semiotics; gesture use by speakers of Australian Indigenous languages; child language and gesture; gesture and neurodi.versity; and gesture in performance. 4.1 Language, cognition, and semiotics     Not surprisingly, many studies on gesture use are interdisciplinary in nature. From a linguistic perspective, we see research reflecting some of the more pressing questions regarding the role of gesture in com.munication and how gesture interacts with dynamic grammatical, lexical, semantic, and semiotic systems in spoken language communication. In discussions about the relationship between sign and gesture, many gesture researchers have focussed on the ways in which gesture and speech are interrelated within a communicative sys.tem. As this burgeoning field of gesture studies has developed, researchers have cre.ated ways of analysing and categorising meaningful bodily actions. Gawne & Kelly (2014) present a study on gesture categorisation, building on observations that people generally have a consistent attitude towards what consti.tutes ¡°significant action.¡± They asked research participants to conceptualise their own categories of gesture and then analyse a short video that contained a predeter.mined variety of bodily movements. They found that those who were not experi.enced in gesture categorisation had a wider conception of what constituted ¡°gesture¡± than analysts did. Gesture also contributes to the processing of language. Murteira et al.¡¯s 2019 study on the role of cross-modal gesture priming on verb retrieval in a picture-naming task shows that a congruent gesture can facilitate lexical retrieval. Of course, speech and gesture are not always temporally aligned, and their contributions to the meaning of an utterance may be partially overlapping or complementary . gestures carry their own social and cultural meanings. Tipton¡¯s 2008 study on the ¡°thumbs up¡± action in Australia highlights cultural differences in its understanding, when it occurs without speech and across different Australian English speech communities. As part of their considerable research on human communication systems, Nicholas Fay et al. (2014) at the University of Western Australia studied adult gesture per.ception and argued that in some scenarios, gesture alone may be a more successful means of communication than gesture and speech together. Questions regarding the distribution of meaning across speech and gesture ¡°ensembles¡± are fundamental to studies of gesture in Australian languages. 4.2 Gesture use by speakers of Australian Indigenous languages     In some of the earliest descriptions of Australian Indigenous spoken languages, there is discussion of gesture and body movement. A regular feature in later studies on gesture and bodily actions in Australian languages is that the work is often based on data sets of naturalistic or seminaturalistic language in interaction, which may then be aug.mented with experimental data. Studies of Australian Indigenous languages have been crucial in extending and challenging findings at the intersection of language, culture, and cognition that have been established in other languages and cultures. One instance is work investigating pointing gestures. In the field of gesture at large and particularly in child language, debates have abounded regarding the primacy of index-finger pointing as a universal communication tool and thus a key aspect of general species-specific human devel.opment (Butterworth 2003). This position was challenged by Wilkins (2003), who investigated the pointing gestures of speakers of Arrernte, a language from Central Australia. He found that the forms and functions of these actions are culture-specific and include some previously little-described variants of one-finger pointing. For ex.ample, a cohort of young children used their middle finger for pointing, indicating cultural variation in the practices of what had previously been regarded as a devel.opmental universal. Other research on pointing highlights gesture use in Indigenous Australia, build.ing upon Haviland¡¯s 1993 work on Guugu Yimithirr. In a thesis on place reference in conversations in Gija, an Indigenous language from the east Kimberley region, north Western Australia, de Dear (2019) looked at multiparty conversational data and investigated how spatial relationships are expressed through talk and point.ing gestures. Similarly, Blythe et al.¡¯s 2016 study showed the commonplace use of gestures for directional marking in Murrinhpatha, a language spoken in the North.ern Territory. Rather than using spoken-language directional terms (e.g., ahead or behind), and in the absence of words such as north, south, east, and west, speakers refer to locations using named landmarks, demonstratives, and pointing. Building on a culturally prescribed avoidance of saying the names of certain places, Blythe et al.¡¯s study reports on the deployment of multimodal resources for giving directions and highlights further cultural and linguistic differences to findings reported in other parts of the world. A comparison between locational pointing in two Australian In.digenous languages (Murrinhpatha and Gija), and in Australian English spoken by non-Indigenous residents of a small town in north Western Australia, was made by de Dear et al. (in press). They found that pointing behaviour is remarkably similar across the three groups, with all participants displaying a capacity to point accurate.ly towards geographic locations regardless of linguistic frame-of-reference options found in their spoken languages. Mapping the flow of time along various spatial axes or relating times of day to the position and path of the sun are common time-reference strategies the world over. Additional perspectives have arisen through studies of time conceptualisation and representation of bodily actions by speakers of Australian Indigenous languages. Boroditsky & Gaby (2010) and Gaby (2012) researched the nonverbal expression of time in Pormpuraaw on the Cape York Peninsula in Queensland. Based on research conducted in the Ngaanyatjarra community of Tjukurla between 1987 and 1992, Jacques Montredon and Ngaanyatjarra linguist Elizabeth Marrkilyi Ellis (2014) col.laborated to analyse gestures relating to time and space.4.3 Child language and gesture     Child language studies are the most widespread areas of research in Australian studies of gesture in communication. Longitudinal studies of gesture development in twelve- to thirty-month-old toddlers have focussed on the emergence of spoken language and gesture use through interaction with adult carers (Kelly 2006; 2011; 2014) and the continued use of gesture in preschool age and beyond (Filippi 2009). There have also been several experimental studies on Australian children¡¯s capacity to use and understand gesture communicatively. These include Bavin et al.¡¯s 2008 study on predicting vocabulary at one and two years on the basis of gesture and object use; Cattani et al.¡¯s 2019 study on cross-linguistic and cross-cultural word-learning in Italian, British English, and Australian English; and Quinn & Kidd¡¯s 2019 study showing gesture use in eighteen-month-old children¡¯s play.Contributing new perspectives and challenging the assumptions of research built upon major world languages becomes particularly important when designing tests of language development. Jones et al. (2020) constructed a parent vocabulary checklist for children growing up in the Katherine region of Northern Territory, with a focus on gestures as well as spoken words. As their research highlights, situating language testing in multimodal and culturally appropriate ways ensures children are measured on the basis of what they can do rather than from the perspective of a deficit model of what they ¡°lack.¡± It thereby accounts for radically different conceptualisations of language and communication development compared to those used in most domi.nant monolingual English-focussed settings. Acknowledging the role of gesture in communication is crucial here and in the broader domain of early language develop.ment.4.4 Gesture and neurodiversity     While many studies have concentrated on neurotypically-developing children, other studies in Australia have focussed on gesture and communication used by neurodiverse children, primarily autistic children. Some focus on gesture and emotion (West et al. 2020). Also prominent are studies of aphasia in older speakers (e.g., Beattie & Shovelton 2006; Rose & Sussmilch 2008; Sekine et al. 2013), including a systematic review indicating research that supports gesture and spoken language treatment for lexical production in some individuals with aphasia (Rose et al. 2013). 4.5 Gesture in performance     In the very different domain of gesture in music, theatre, and dance, Naveda & Leman (2010) examined the spatiotemporal representation of dance and macro-level whole body movements they characterised as ¡°basic gestures,¡± extending well beyond the gesture spaces generally examined in other gesture research reported here. Later work on whole body movements and gesture has suggested that these movements can aid in facilitating and understanding the physiological functions of singing (Nafisi 2014) and can assist in children¡¯s understanding of digital literacy in a film context (Ngo 2018). Extending music-focussed work that crosses linguistic, semiotic, and cognitive domains, Parton (2014; 2020) used distributed cognition and ethnography frameworks to examine the semiotic resources deployed in orchestral conducting and investigated the ways in which the gestures of a conductor are situated, embodied, and cognitively distributed in interaction. 5. Sign, gesture, and technology     There was some early research on automating machine recognition of Auslan (Holden et al. 2005), but Auslan-based technology development has mostly focussed on creating tools for children and adults learning Auslan. Researchers have designed mobile video games to support young deaf chil.dren learning Auslan (Korte et al. 2012) and explored the use of the Leap Motion controller (Potter et al. 2013) and the potential of motion capture in the Micro.soft Kinect gaming console to give feedback to learners about whether a sign has been produced correctly (Fisher et al. 2014; Ellis et al. 2015). Researchers have also collaborated on the development of software to support Web-based dictionaries of signed languages (Carew & Green 2015; Cassidy et al. 2018).In technology-oriented research across engineering and computer sciences, there are several foci in human computer interaction and gesture. One prominent area of gesture technology research in Australia is the broad field of gesture recognition. The availability of high-quality recordings and of movement-tracking technologies has allowed researchers working in areas such as computer-generated imagery (CGI) to develop tools for recognising (Perera et al. 2019) and tracking (Cook et al. 2015) fine-grained gesture movement, such as finger actions, in digital environments in.volving human avatars. Although this work draws upon related gesture work re.garding the semiotic significance of gesture, it has little overlap with the other re.search considered here.6. Conclusions     Finally, we draw together some of the threads that research on Australian sign and gesture have in common and point to particular issues that may inform research agendas in the future. As is the case globally, studies on gesture and on sign languages . historically marginalised in linguistics and other communica.tion sciences . are finally gaining greater recognition. Such research is vital for in.forming many different aspects of linguistic theory, including debates on the nature of the human language capacity. It advances our understanding of why languages differ and helps to address the question of whether the diverse range of languages we see in the world today share some universal patterns of organisation (see, e.g., Evans & Levinson 2009). Studies of signed languages are crucial for broadening our knowledge of human communication, thus moving beyond dominant epistemolo.gies of spoken and written language use . what Braithwaite (2019: 161) has termed ¡°widespread modality chauvinism.¡± As it is widely recognised that gestures appear to occur whenever people communicate, the study of co-speech gesture leads to a greater understanding of human communication and cognition (Kendon 2004; see also Johnston 1996). It is crucial that these global scientific enterprises draw on as broad a selection of languages as possible. In this respect, Australia . as home to a rich diversity of both spoken and signed languages . has much to offer. Australia provides fertile ground for researching the broad repertoire of human communica.tion practices, thus raising bigger questions about the shape and evolution of human languages in general. As our review of the first two decades of the twenty-first century demonstrates, researchers who study Australian Indigenous sign languages, Auslan, and gesture have offered important contributions to the goal of understanding ¡°language¡± in its broadest sense. They have developed innovative methodologies for documenting these practices that are well adapted to fieldwork conditions in Australia (see Mea.kins et al. 2018). The importance of documenting and developing well-structured, machine-readable corpora cannot be overstated, and Auslan researchers have been pioneers in this regard (see Johnston 2010b). The benefits of this approach have been demonstrated by research on Auslan using the Auslan Corpus, which has shown that many earlier claims about deaf community sign languages need to be re-interro.gated. As discussed above, researchers of signed languages and gesture in Australia have benefitted enormously from new technologies and computer software and ap.proaches to video annotation that have been shared across disciplines. Where do we go from here? The broad view of language implicit in this review article points to new avenues for research in both applied and theoretical contexts. Our review highlights the need for further descriptive work, especially that with an emphasis on the use of sign and gesture in interaction. Other lesser-studied aspects of language, including everyday language and communication phenomena that have traditionally been marginalised or neglected altogether in linguistics, also require at.tention . for example, to date, there is little research in Australia on the role of vocal gesture. There remains much work to be done to understand language change, con.tact phenomena, multilingualism, and multimodality by including a wider range of speakers and/or signers. The need to broaden our perspectives applies also to topics such as how deaf and hearing children and adults learn Auslan and the many factors influencing signing diversity in general. Links between language and mental health, often cited as a factor integral to building resilience and health within Australian Indigenous communities, also apply to deaf people¡¯s lived experiences and mental health, especially with regard to their access to language.While Australia is rich in linguistic diversity, the need to support Australia¡¯s fragile heritage of languages and communication practices is acute. Australian Indigenous spoken languages are highly endangered, with only an estimated twelve of Australia¡¯s original 250.300 spoken languages regarded as ¡°strong¡± enough to be transmitted intergenerationally (Australian Government 2020). Although it is very difficult to do so in a principled fashion, sign is seldom factored into these calculations, even when it may be the primary mode of communication for some and used as an alternative to speech or alongside it by others. Adams & Crowe (2019) argue that diversity of languages should be seen as an indicator of the health of social ecosystems and that these metrics should include sign languages. This situation extends to the compromised vitality of Auslan, with generations of signers having to continuously agitate for access to sign language as a human right. There is an urgent need to prevent language deprivation in deaf children who have no access to languages such as Auslan, and to support the many programmes and policies required to mitigate the cumulative impact of decades of poor education outcomes for deaf Australians. The systemic pressures affecting people, communities, and languages are extreme. For example, there is only one normed assessment tool to assess deaf children¡¯s Auslan receptive and productive skills, but the standardised scores for this assessment may only be applied to deaf children age four to eleven who do not have cognitive and/or physical disabilities. Much of the signing population remains underrepresented in all aspects of Auslan research. The signing of deaf signers who learned Auslan after childhood or later in life has been the focus of very little research, and they need to be included without detracting from the importance of the unfinished work of describing Auslan as used by deaf or hearing people who have been signing from birth or early childhood. This is necessary if we are to accurately describe the entire signing deaf community.As is the case globally, the Australian context also highlights the need for at.tention to issues of social equity in research; to consider the roles of Indigenous researchers, deaf researchers, and practitioner researchers; and to adopt research methods that are both sustainable and accountable. There is a growing need to rec.ognise nonacademic expertise and local epistemologies, since such collaborations may be the only way to avoid continuously ¡°reinventing the wheel¡± with respect to social equity and other issues. While some progress has been made, there is a long way to go before the imbalance between ¡°insider¡± and ¡°outsider¡± linguists is ad.dressed. This also raises the issue of appropriate and accessible design for resources that can support knowledge and learning of Australian sign languages, including the sign languages of Indigenous Australia and Auslan.The attempt to move away from modality-defined silos when it comes to the focus of research can lead to exciting research that challenges previously drawn boundaries and, in broader terms, requires us to ¡°rethink the margins of language¡± (Dingemanse 2018). Further investigation of sign languages and gesture in Australia will lead to better understandings of human communication overall and of the ways different combinations of semiotic signalling between people with diverse linguistic and cultural backgrounds manifest in everyday interactions. This will, in turn, pro.vide rich insights about what this semiotic diversity says about human language, communication, and cognition.General referencesAIATSIS (Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies). 2020. AIATSIS code of ethics for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander research. Can.berra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies (AIAT.SIS).Australian Government. 2020. National Indigenous languages report. Canberra: Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Communi.cations (DoITRDC); Australian Institute for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies (AIATSIS); and Australian National University.Braithwaite, Ben. 2019. Sign language endangerment and linguistic diversity. Lan.guage 95(1). 161.187. doi:10.1353/lan.2019.0025 Dingemanse, Mark. 2018. Redrawing the margins of language: Lessons from research on ideophones. Glossa: A Journal of General Linguistics 3(1). 4. doi:10.5334/gjgl.444 Enfield, Nick J. 2009. The anatomy of meaning: Speech, gesture, and composite ut.terances. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Evans, Nicholas & Stephen C. Levinson. 2009. The myth of language universals: Language diversity and its importance for cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 32(5). 429.448. doi:10.1017/S0140525X0999094X Goldin-Meadow, Susan & Diane Brentari. 2017. Gesture, sign, and language: The coming of age of sign language and gesture studies. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 40. e46. doi:10.1017/S0140525X15001247Hodge, Gabrielle, Jennifer Green, & Barbara F. Kelly. 2021. The Australian sign & gesture reference library. doi:10.17605/OSF.IO/CXNBVKendon, Adam. 2004. Gesture: Visible action as utterance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Kendon, Adam. 2008a. Some reflections on the relationship between ¡®gesture¡¯ and ¡®sign.¡¯ Gesture 8(3). 348.366. doi:10.1075/gest.8.3.05kenM¨¹ller, Cornelia. 2018. Gesture and sign: Cataclysmic break or dynamic relations? Frontiers in Psychology 9. 1651. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01651Seyfeddinipur, Mandana. 2012. Reasons for documenting gestures and suggestions for how to go about it. In Thieberger, Nick (ed.), The Oxford handbook of lin.guistic fieldwork, 147.165. Oxford: Oxford University Press.Vigliocco, Gabriella, Pamela Perniss, & David Vinson. 2014. Language as a mul.timodal phenomenon: Implications for language learning, processing and evo.lution. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 369(1651), 20130292. doi:10.1098/rstb.2013.0292Wittenburg, Pete, Hennie Brugman, Albert Russel, Alex Klassmann, & Han Sloetjes. 2006. ELAN: A professional framework for multimodality research. In Calzolari, Nicoletta, Khalid Choukri, Aldo Gangemi, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, Jan Odijk, & Daniel Tapias (eds.), Proceedings of LREC 2006, Fifth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, 1556.1559. Genoa: Euro.pean Language Resources Association.The Australian sign & gesture reference librarySee here for the online library of publications on which this review article is based (Hodge et al. 2021). ACARA (Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority). 2016. Aus.lan: The Australian Curriculum. (https://www.australiancurriculum.edu.au/f-10-curriculum/languages/auslan/) (Accessed 2021-09-17.)Access Economics. 2006. Listen hear! The economic impact and cost of hearing loss in Australia. (https://hearnet.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/ListenHearFi.nal.pdf) (Accessed 2021-09-17.)Adam, Robert. 2012. Language contact and borrowing. In Pfau, Roland, Markus Steinbach, & Bencie Woll (eds.), Sign language: An international handbook, 841.862. Berlin: De Gruyter.Adam, Robert. 2015a. Dissemination and transfer of knowledge to the Deaf Com.munity. In Orfanidou, Eleni, Bencie Woll, & Gary Morgan (eds.), Research meth.ods in sign language studies: A practical guide, 41.52. Malden: Wiley Blackwell.Adam, Robert. 2015b. Standardization of sign languages. Sign Language Studies 15(4). 432.445. doi:10.1353/sls.2015.0015Adam, Robert. 2016a. International signs. In Gertz, Genie & Patrick Boudreault (eds.), The SAGE Deaf Studies encyclopaedia, 485.487. Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications.Adam, Robert. 2016b. Unimodal bilingualism in the Deaf community: Language contact between two sign languages in Australia and the United Kingdom. Lon.don: University College London. (Doctoral thesis.)Adam, Robert, Breda Carty, & Christopher Stone. 2011. Ghostwriting: Deaf translators within the Deaf Community. Babel 57(4). 375.393. doi:10.1075/babel.57.4.01adaAdam, Robert & Christopher Stone. 2011. Through a historical lens: Contextu.alising interpreting research. Advances in Interpreting Research 99. 225.239. doi:10.1075/btl.99.13adaAdams, Rodney & Kathryn Crowe. 2019. The revitalisation of Indigenous sign lan.guages. In Proceedings of the Foundation for Endangered Languages Conference (FEL-XXIII). 8. Sydney: University of Sydney.Adone, Dany, Anastasia Bauer, Keren Cumberbatch, & Elaine Maypilama. 2012. Colour signs in two Indigenous sign languages. In Zeshan, Ulrike & Connie de Vos (eds.), Sign languages in village communities: Anthropological and linguistic insights, vol. 4, 53.86. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton. Adone, Dany & Elaine Maypilama. 2014a. A grammar sketch of Yol.u Sign Lan.guage. Darwin: Charles Darwin University.Adone, Dany & Elaine Maypilama. 2014b. Bimodal bilingualism in Arnhem Land. Australian Aboriginal Studies 1(2). 101.106.Adone, Dany & Elaine Maypilama. 2015. The sociolinguistics of alternate sign lan.guages of Arnhem Land. Learning Communities: International Journal of Learn.ing in Social Contexts (Indigenous Sign Language 16). 14.25. doi:10.18793/LCJ2015.16.02Anderson, Melissa & Breda Carty. 2014. The cosmopolitan correspondence club. In Snoddon, Kristin (ed.), Telling Deaf lives: Agents of change, 148.162. Washing.ton, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Australian Indigenous HealthInfoNet. 2019. Overview of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health status 2018. Perth: Australian Indigenous HealthInfoNet.Bauer, Anastasia. 2014. The use of signing space in a shared sign language of Austra.lia. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton. doi:10.1515/9781614515470Bavin, Edith, Margot Prior, Sheena Reilly, Lesley Bretherton, Joanne Williams, Patri.cia Eadie, Yin Barrett, & Obi Ukoumunne. 2008. The early language in Victoria study: Predicting vocabulary at age one and two years from gesture and object use. Journal of Child Language 35(3). 687.701. doi:10.1017/S0305000908008726Bayley, Robert, Adam Schembri, & Ceil Lucas (eds.). 2015. Variation and change in sign languages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Beattie, Geoffrey & Heather Shovelton. 2006. A critical appraisal of the re.lationship between speech and gesture and its implications for the treat.ment of aphasia. Advances in Speech Language Pathology 8(2). 134.139. doi:10.1080/14417040600667392Beaver, Sherrie & Breda Carty. 2021. Viewing the healthcare system through a deaf lens. Public Health Research & Practice. http://dx.doi.org/10.17061/phrp3152127 Blythe, Joe. 2012. From passing-gesture to ¡®true¡¯ romance: Kin-based teasing in Mur.riny Patha conversation. Journal of Pragmatics 44(4). 508.528. doi:10.1016/j.pragma.2011.11.005Blythe, Joe, Kinngirri Carmelita Mardigan, Mawurt Ernest Perdjert, & Hywel Stoakes. 2016. Pointing out directions in Murrinhpatha. Open Linguistics 2(1). 132.159. doi:10.1515/opli-2016-0007Bone, Tracey, Erin Wilkinson, Danielle Ferndale, & Rodney Adams. 2021. In.digenous and Deaf people and the implications of ongoing practices of colo.nization: A comparison of Australia and Canada. Humanity & Society. 1.27. doi:10.1177/01605976211001575Bontempo, Karen. 2005. A survey of Auslan interpreters¡¯ perceptions of competence. Sydney: Macquarie University. (Master¡¯s thesis.)Bontempo, Karen. 2012. Interpreting by design: A study of aptitude, ability, and achievement in Australian Sign Language interpreters. Sydney: Macquarie Uni.versity. (Doctoral thesis.)Bontempo, Karen. 2013. The chicken and egg dilemma: Academizing a semiprofes.sion. In Winston, Elizabeth & Christine Monikowski (eds.), Evolving paradigms in interpreting education: Impact of interpreting research on teaching interpret.ing, 33.41. Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Bontempo, Karen. 2015. Sign language interpreting. In Mikkelson, Holly & Ren¨¦e Jourdenais (eds.), Handbook of interpreting, 112.128. Philadelphia: Routledge.Bontempo, Karen. 2016. Interpreting: Tasks. In Boudreault, Patrick & Genie Gertz (eds.), The SAGE Deaf Studies encyclopedia, 519.522. Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications.Bontempo, Karen, Della Goswell, Patti Levitzke-Gray, Jemina Napier, & Linda War.by. 2014. Testing times: Toward the professionalization of deaf interpreters in Australia. In Adam, Robert, Christopher Stone, Steven D. Collins, & Melanie Metzger (eds.), Deaf interpreters at work: International insights, 51.89. Wash.ington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Bontempo, Karen & Josie Hodgetts. 2002. Heritage WA: History of the WA Deaf Society 1921.2001. Leederville: The Western Australian Deaf Society.Bontempo, Karen & Bethel Hutchinson. 2011. Striving for an ¡®A¡¯ grade: A case study of performance management of interpreters. International Journal of Interpreter Education 3. 56.71.Bontempo, Karen & Patti Levitzke-Gray. 2009. Interpreting down under: Signed language interpreter education and training in Australia. In Napier, Jemina (ed.), International perspectives on signed language interpreter education, 149.170. Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Bontempo, Karen & Karen Malcolm. 2012. An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure: Educating interpreters about the risk of vicarious trauma in healthcare settings. In Swabey, Laurie & Karen Malcolm (eds.), In our hands: Educating healthcare interpreters, 105.130. Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Bontempo, Karen & Jemina Napier. 2007. Mind the gap! A skills analysis of sign lan.guage interpreters. The Sign Language Translator and Interpreter 1(2). 275.299.Bontempo, Karen & Jemina Napier. 2009. Getting it right from the start: Program admission testing of signed language interpreters. In Angelelli, Claudia & Holly Jacobson (eds.), Testing and assessment in translation and interpreting studies, 247.295. Philadelphia: John Benjamins.Bontempo, Karen & Jemina Napier. 2011. Evaluating emotional stability as a pre.dictor of interpreter competence and aptitude for interpreting. Interpreting 13(1). 85.105. doi:10.1075/intp.13.1.06bonBontempo, Karen & Jemina Napier. 2014. Evaluating emotional stability as a pre.dictor of interpreter competence and aptitude for interpreting. In P.chhacker, Franz & Minhua Liu (eds.), Aptitude for interpreting, 87.106. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.Bontempo, Karen, Jemina Napier, Laurence Hayes, & Vicki Brashear. 2014. Does personality matter? An international study of sign language interpreter dispo.sition. Translation and Interpreting 6(1). 23.46. doi:10.12807/ti.106201.2014.a02 Boroditsky, Lera & Alice Gaby. 2010. Remembrances of times east: Absolute spatial representations of time in an Australian Aboriginal community. Psychological Science 21(11). 1635.1639. doi:10.1177/0956797610386621Branson, Jan & Don Miller. 2005. Damned for their difference: The cultural con.struction of Deaf people as disabled. Scandinavian Journal of Disability Research 7(2). 129.132. doi:10.1080/15017410510032244 Bridge, Marianne. 2009. A study of the application of translation approaches and methodologies to the translation of English written text into Australian Sign Lan.guage (Auslan). Melbourne: Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology University. (Unpublished minor thesis.)Butcher, Andy. 2015. The origins of alternate sign languages in Australia: Could they include hearing impairment? Learning Communities: International Journal of Learning in Social Contexts 16. 26.39. doi:10.18793/LCJ2015.16.03 Butterworth, George. 2003. Pointing is the royal road to language for babies. In Kita, Sotaro (ed.), Pointing: Where language, culture, & cognition meet, 9.33. Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.Campbell, April, Margaret Carew, Jennifer Green, & Ben Foley. (2013) 2021. Ilty.em-iltyem . Australian Indigenous sign languages. Alice Springs: Batchelor Insti.tute. (https://iltyemiltyem.com/) (Accessed 2021-09-23.)Carew, Margaret & Jennifer Green. 2015. Making an online dictionary for Cen.tral Australian sign languages. Learning Communities: International Journal of Learning in Social Contexts 16. 40.55. doi:10.18793/LCJ2015.16.04 Carty, Breda. 2000. John Carmichael: Australian Deaf pioneer. Deaf History Journal 3(3). 24.36.Carty, Breda. 2006. Comments on ¡°W(h)ither the Deaf community?¡± Sign Language Studies 6(2). 181.189. doi:10.1353/sls.2006.0002Carty, Breda. 2016. The ¡°breakaways¡±: Deaf citizens¡¯ groups in Australia in the 1920s and 1930s. In Greenwald, Brian & Joseph Murray (eds.), In our own hands: Essays in deaf history 1780.1970, 211.238. Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Carty, Breda. 2018. Managing their own affairs: The Australian Deaf community in the 1920s and 1930s. Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Carty, Breda & Darlene Thornton. 2011. Deaf people in colonial Australia. In Hed.berg, Tomas (ed.), No history, no future: Proceedings of the 7th DHI Interna.tional Conference, Stockholm 2009, 148.155. Orebro, Sweden: Swedish Deaf History Society.Cassidy, Steve, Onno Crasborn, Henri Nieminen, Wessel Stoop, Micha Hulsbosch, Susan Even, Erwin Komen, & Trevor Johnston. 2018. Signbank: Software to support Web-based dictionaries of sign language. In Calzolari, Nicoletta, Khalid Choukri, Christopher Cieri, Thierry Declerck, Sara Goggi, Koiti Hasida, Hitoshi Isahara, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, H¨¦l¨¨ne Mazo, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, & Takenobu Tokunagae (eds.), Proceedings of LREC 2018 Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, 2359.2364. Paris: European Language Resources Association. (http://www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2018/summaries/499.html) (Accessed 2021-09-17.)Cassidy, Steve & Trevor Johnston. 2009. Ingesting the Auslan corpus into the DADA Annotation Store. In Proceedings of the Third Linguistic Annotation Workshop (ACL-IJCNLP ¡¯09), 154.157. Stroudsburg: Association for Computational Lin.guistics.Cattani, Allegra, Caroline Floccia, Evan Kidd, Paola Pettenati, Daniela Onofrio, & Virginia Volterra. 2019. Gestures and words in naming: Evidence from cross.linguistic and crosscultural comparison. Language Learning 69(3). 709.746. doi:10.1111/lang.12346Cogill-Koez, Dorothea. 2000a. A model of signed language ¡°classifier predicates¡± as templated visual representation. Sign Language & Linguistics 3(2). 209.236. doi:10.1075/sll.3.2.04cogCogill-Koez, Dorothea. 2000b. Signed language classifier predicates: Linguistic structures or schematic visual representation? Sign Language & Linguistics 3(2). 153.207. doi:10.1075/sll.3.2.03cogColeman, Andrea, Amanda Wood, Seweryn Bialasiewicz, Robert Ware, Robyn Marsh, & Anders Cervin. 2018. The unsolved problem of otitis media in In.digenous populations: A systematic review of upper respiratory and middle ear microbiology in Indigenous children with otitis media. Microbiome 6(199). doi:10.1186/s40168-018-0577-2Conlon, Caroline & Jemina Napier. 2004. Developing Auslan educational resources: A process of effective translation of children¡¯s books. Deaf Worlds: International Journal of Deaf Studies 20(2). 141.161.Cook, Harrison, Quang Vinh Nguyen, Simeon Simoff, Tomas Trescak, & Dean Pres.ton. 2015. A close-range gesture interaction with Kinect. In Engelke, Ulrich, Ju.lian Heinrich, Tomasz Bednarz, Karsten Klein, & Quang Vinh Nguyen (eds.), 2015 Big Data Visual Analytics (BDVA), 1.8. Piscataway: IEEE. doi:10.1109/BDVA.2015.7314284Cormier, Kearsy, Adam Schembri, & Martha Tyrone. 2008. One hand or two? Na.tivisation of fingerspelling in ASL and BANZSL. Sign Language & Linguistics 11(1). 3.44. doi:10.1075/sll.11.1.03corCormier, Kearsy, Adam Schembri, & Bencie Woll. 2010. Diversity across sign lan.guages and spoken languages: Implications for language universals. Lingua 120(12). 2664.2667. doi:10.1016/j.lingua.2010.03.016 Cormier, Kearsy, Adam Schembri, & Bencie Woll. 2013. Pronouns and pointing in sign languages. Lingua 137. 230.247. doi:10.1016/j.lingua.2013.09.010Cornes, Andy & Jemina Napier. 2005. Challenges of mental health interpret.ing when working with deaf patients. Australasian Psychiatry 13(4). 403.407. doi:10.1080/j.1440-1665.2005.02218.xCornes, Andy, Meg Rohan, Jemina Napier, & Joseph Rey. 2006. Reading the signs: Impact of signed versus written questionnaires on the prevalence of psychopa.thology among deaf adolescents. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psy.chiatry 40(8). 665.673. doi:10.1080/j.1440-1614.2006.01866.xCresdee, Donovan. 2006. A study of the way(s) to teach signed discourse cohesion, particularly reference, within a story text. Darwin: Charles Darwin University. (Doctoral thesis.)Cresdee, Donovan & Trevor Johnston. 2014. Using corpus-based research to inform the teaching of Auslan (Australian Sign Language) as a second language. In McK.ee, David, Russell Rosen, & Rachel McKee (eds.), Teaching and learning signed languages: International perspectives and practices, 85.110. London: Palgrave Macmillan UK. doi:10.1057/9781137312495_5Dangerfield, Kirri & Jemina Napier. 2016. Tracking the development of critical self-reflective practice of a novice sign language interpreter: A case study. Journal of Interpretation 25(1). 3. (https://digitalcommons.unf.edu/joi/vol25/iss1/3) (Ac.cessed 2021-09-17.)de Beuzeville, Louise. 2004. The acquisition of classifier signs in Auslan (Austra.lian Sign Language) by Deaf children from Deaf families: A preliminary analysis. Deaf Worlds: International Journal of Deaf Studies 20(2). 120.140.de Beuzeville, Louise. 2006. Visual and linguistic representation in the acquisition of depicting verbs: A study of native signing deaf children of Auslan (Australian Sign Language). Sydney: Macquarie University. (Doctoral thesis.)de Beuzeville, Louise, Trevor Johnston, & Adam Schembri. 2009. The use of space with indicating verbs in Auslan: A corpus-based investigation. Sign Language & Linguistics 12(1). 53.82. doi:10.1075/sll.12.1.03debde Dear, Caroline. 2019. Place reference and pointing in Gija conversation. Sydney: Macquarie University. (Master¡¯s thesis.)de Dear, Caroline, Francesco Possemato, Lesley Stirling, Rod Gardner, Ilana Mushin, Frances Kofod, & Joe Blythe. In press. Place reference and locational pointing in Murrinhpatha, Gija and English conversation. Gesture.DeLacy, Jack, Tinasha Dune, & John Macdonald. 2020. The social determinants of otitis media in Aboriginal children in Australia: Are we addressing the primary causes? A systematic content review. BMC Public Health 20(492). doi:10.1186/s12889-020-08570-3de Meulder, Maartje. 2019. ¡°So, why do you sign?¡± Deaf and hearing new signers, their motivation, and revitalisation policies for sign languages. Applied Linguis.tics Review 10(4). 705.724. doi:10.1515/applirev-2017-0100htDillon, Angela. 2015. Negotiating two worlds through the media: Debates about Deaf education and sign language from 1970 to 2000. Adelaide: University of South Australia. (Doctoral thesis.)Ellis, Elizabeth Marrkilyi, Jennifer Green, & Inge Kral. 2017. Family in mind: Socio-spatial knowledge in a Ngaatjatjarra/Ngaanyatjarra children¡¯s game. Research on Children and Social Interaction 1(2). 164.198. doi:10.1558/rcsi.28442 Ellis, Elizabeth Marrkilyi, Jennifer Green, Inge Kral, & Lauren Reed. 2019. Mara yurriku: Western Desert sign languages. Australian Aboriginal Studies 2. 89.111.Ellis, Kirsten, Julie Fisher, Louisa Willoughby, & Jan Carlo Barca. 2015. A design science exploration of a visual-spatial learning system with feedback. In Burst.ein, Frada, Helana Scheepers, & Gaye Deegan (eds.), Proceedings of the 26th Australasian Conference on Information Systems, 1.13. Adelaide: Australasian Conference on Information Systems.Fay, Nicolas, Casey Lister, T. Mark Ellison, & Susan Goldin-Meadow. 2014. Cre.ating a communication system from scratch: Gesture beats vocalization hands down. Frontiers in Psychology 5. 354. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00354Fenlon, Jordan, Adam Schembri, Trevor Johnston, & Kearsy Cormier. 2015. Documentary and corpus approaches to sign language research. In Orfani.dou, Eleni, Bencie Woll, & Gary Morgan (eds.), Research methods in sign language studies: A practical guide, 156.172. Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons. doi:10.1002/9781118346013.ch10 Ferrara, Lindsay. 2012. The grammar of depiction: Exploring gesture and language in Australian Sign Language (Auslan). Sydney: Macquarie University. (Doctoral thesis.) (http://hdl.handle.net/11250/218845)Ferrara, Lindsay & Gabrielle Hodge. 2018. Language as description, indication, and depiction. Frontiers in Psychology 9. 716. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00716Ferrara, Lindsay & Trevor Johnston. 2014. Elaborating who¡¯s what: A study of con.structed action and clause structure in Auslan (Australian Sign Language). Aus.tralian Journal of Linguistics 34(2). 193.215. doi:10.1080/07268602.2014.887405Filipi, Anna. 2009. Toddler and parent interaction: The organisation of gaze, point.ing and vocalisation. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.Fisher, Julie, Kirsten Ellis, Louisa Willoughby, & Jan Barca. 2014. Taking a user cen.tred design approach for designing a system to teach sign language. In Wang, Wil.liam & David Pauleen (eds.), Proceedings of the 25th Australasian Conference on Information Systems, 1.10. Auckland: Australasian Conference on Information Systems.Gaby, Alice. 2012. The Thaayorre think of time like they talk of space. Frontiers in Psychology 3. 300. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00300Gaby, Alice & Lesley Woods. 2020. Toward linguistic justice for Indigenous people: A response to Charity Hudley, Mallinson and Bucholtz. Language 96(4). 268.280. doi:10.1353/lan.2020.0078Gawne, Lauren & Barbara Kelly. 2014. Revisiting significant action and gesture categorization. Australian Journal of Linguistics 34(2). 216.233. doi:10.1080/07268602.2014.887406Goswell, Della. 2011. Being there: Role shift in English to Auslan interpreting. In Leeson, Lorraine, Svenja Wurm, & Myriam Vermeerbergen (eds.), Signed lan.guage interpreting: Preparation, practice and performance, 61.86. Manchester: St. Jerome Publishing.Goswell, Della. 2012. Do you see what I see? Using ELAN for self-analysis and re.flection. International Journal of Interpreter Education 4(1). 72.81.Goswell, Della, Andy Carmichael, & Sofya Gollan. 2008. Lights, cameraÿinterpre.tation! In Hauser, Peter, Karen Finch, & Angela Hauser (eds.), Deaf professionals and designated interpreters: A new paradigm, 196.209. Washington, DC: Gal.laudet University Press.Gray, Michael. 2013. Aspect marking in Auslan: A system of gestural verb modi.fication. Sydney: Macquarie University. (Doctoral thesis.) (http://hdl.handle.net/1959.14/305943)Green, Jennifer. 2010. Between the earth and the air: Multimodality in Arandic sand stories. Melbourne: The University of Melbourne. (Doctoral thesis.)Green, Jennifer. 2014a. Drawn from the ground: Sound, sign, and inscription in Central Australian sand stories (Language Culture and Cognition). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Green, Jennifer. 2014b. Signs and space in Arandic sand narratives. In Seyfeddinipur, Mandana & Marianne Gullberg (eds.), Gesture in conversation to visible action as utterance: Essays in honor of Adam Kendon, 219.243. Amsterdam: John Ben.jamins. doi:10.1075/z.188.11greGreen, Jennifer. 2016. Multimodal complexity in sand story narratives. Narrative Inquiry 26(2). 312.339. doi:10.1075/ni.26.2.06greGreen, Jennifer. 2019. Embodying kin-based respect in speech, sign, and gesture. Gesture 18(2/3). 370.395. doi:10.1075/gest.20015.greGreen, Jennifer. 2021a. Mothers, mountain devils and pointing to eternity: The ¡®horns¡¯ handshape in Australian Indigenous sign languages. Sign Language Stud.ies 22(1). 5.41.Green, Jennifer. 2021b. Visible talk: Looking at Australian Indigenous sign languag.es. In McFarlane, Kyla (ed.), Language: Potter inter-disciplinary forum, 18.26. Melbourne: Ian Potter Museum of Art. (https://art-museum.unimelb.edu.au/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/IPM_Language_online.pdf) (Accessed 2021-11-01.)Green, Jennifer, Cassandra Algy, Felicity Meakins, & Karungkarni Art. 2017. Takata.ka: Gurindji sign language posters. Darwin: Batchelor Press.Green, Jennifer, Anastasia Bauer, Alice Gaby, & Elizabeth Marrkilyi Ellis. 2018. Pointing to the body: Kin signs in Australian Indigenous sign languages. Gesture 17(1). 1.36. doi:10.1075/gest.00009.gre Green, Jennifer, Margaret Carew, & Carolyn Coleman. 2020. Maningrida kin sign posters. Darwin: Batchelor Press.Green, Jennifer, Barbara Kelly, & Adam Schembri. 2014. Finding common ground: Sign language and gesture research in Australia. Australian Journal of Linguistics 34(2). 185.192. doi:10.1080/07268602.2014.887404Green, Jennifer & Inge Kral. 2020. Digital drawings from the desert. In Kral, Inge, Jennifer Green, & Elizabeth Marrkilyi Ellis (eds.), i-Tjuma: Ngaanyatjarra stories from the Western Desert of Central Australia, 6.21. Perth: University of Western Australia Press.Green, Jennifer & David P. Wilkins. 2014. With or without speech: Arandic sign lan.guage from Central Australia. Australian Journal of Linguistics 34(2). 234.261. doi:10.1080/07268602.2014.887407Green, Jennifer & David P. Wilkins. 2015. Arandic alternate sign language(s). In Jepsen, Julie Bakken, Goedele de Clerck, Sam Lutalo-Kiingi, & William B. Mc.Gregor (eds.), Sign languages of the world: A comparative handbook, 843.870. Berlin: De Gruyter.Green, Jennifer, Gail Woods, & Ben Foley. 2011. Looking at language: Appropriate design for sign language resources in remote Australian Indigenous communities. In Thieberger, Nick, Linda Barwick, Rosey Billington, & Jill Vaughan (eds.), Sus.tainable data from digital research: Humanities perspectives on digital research, 66.89. Melbourne: University of Melbourne.Green, Rebecca, Jennifer Green, David Osgarby, Amanda Hamilton, Felicity Meak.ins, & Rob Pensalfini. 2019. Mudburra to English dictionary. Canberra: Aborigi.nal Studies Press.Hale, Sandra & Jemina Napier. 2016. ¡°We¡¯re just kind of there¡±: Working condi.tions and perceptions of appreciation and status in court interpreting. Target 28(3). 351.371. doi:10.1075/target.28.3.01hal Hale, Sandra, Mehera San Roque, David Spencer, & Jemina Napier. 2018. Deaf citizens as jurors in Australian courts: Participating via professional interpret.ers. International Journal of Speech, Language, and the Law 24(2). 151.176. doi:10.1558/ijsll.32896Hall, Wyatte. 2017. What you don¡¯t know can hurt you: The risk of language depri.vation by impairing sign language development in deaf children. Maternal and Child Health Journal 21(5). 961.965. doi:10.1007/s10995-017-2287-yHaug, Tobias, Karen Bontempo, Lorraine Leeson, Jemina Napier, Brenda Nicode.mus, Beppie Van den Bogaerde, & Myriam Vermeerbergen. 2017. Deaf lead.ers¡¯ strategies for working with signed language interpreters: An examina.tion across seven countries. Across Languages and Cultures 18(1). 107.131. doi:10.1556/084.2017.18.1.5Haviland, John B. 1993. Anchoring, iconicity, and orientation in Guugu Yimithirr pointing gestures. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology 3(1). 3.45. doi:10.1525/jlin.1993.3.1.3 Herman, Ros, Sally Holmes, Bencie Woll, Adam Schembri, Gabrielle Hodge, & Ida Rogers. 2014. Assessing Auslan (Australian Sign Language) development: The Auslan Receptive Skills Test and Productive Skills Test [Assessment tool]. Mel.bourne: Victorian Deaf Education Institute.Hodge, Gabrielle. 2014. Patterns from a signed language corpus: Clause-like units in Auslan (Australian Sign Language). Sydney: Macquarie University. (Doctoral thesis.) (http://hdl.handle.net/1959.14/323269)Hodge, Gabrielle. 2020. The ideology of communication practices embedded in an Australian deaf/hearing dance collaboration. In Kusters, Annelies, Mara Green, Erin Moriarty, & Kristin Snoddon (eds.), Sign language ideologies in practice, 59.82. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton. doi:10.1515/9781501510090-004Hodge, Gabrielle & Kearsy Cormier. 2019. Reported speech as enactment. Linguis.tic Typology 23(1). 185.196. doi:10.1515/lingty-2019-0008Hodge, Gabrielle & Onno Crasborn. 2022. Best practices in annotation. In Fenlon, Jordan & Julie Hochgesang (eds.), Signed language corpora. Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press. (http://gupress.gallaudet.edu/signed-language-corpo.ra.html)Hodge, Gabrielle & Lindsay Ferrara. 2014. Showing the story: Enactment as per.formance in Auslan narratives. In Gawne, Lauren & Jill Vaughan (eds.), Selected papers from the 44th Conference of the Australian Linguistic Society, 2013, 372.397. Melbourne: University of Melbourne. (http://hdl.handle.net/11343/40973)Hodge, Gabrielle, Lindsay Ferrara, & Benjamin Anible. 2019. The semiotic diversity of doing reference in a deaf signed language. Journal of Pragmatics 143. 33.53. doi:10.1016/j.pragma.2019.01.025Hodge, Gabrielle & Sara Goico. 2022. Natural and elicited: Sign language corpus linguistics and linguistic ethnography as complementary methodologies. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 26: 126-136. doi: 10.1111/josl.12523Hodge, Gabrielle & Della Goswell. 2021. Deaf signing diversity and signed language translations. Applied Linguistics Review. doi:10.1515/applirev-2020-0034Hodge, Gabrielle, Della Goswell, Lori Whynot, Stephanie Linder, & Cathy Clark. 2015a. Guidelines: English into Auslan Video Production (Version 1.2). Sydney: Australian Communications Consumer Action Network. (https://accan.org.au/files/Grants/English-into-AuslanTranslationGuidelinesV1.2.pdf) (Accessed 2021-11-01.)Hodge, Gabrielle, Della Goswell, Lori Whynot, Stephanie Linder, & Cathy Clark. 2015b. What standards? The need for developing evidence-based Auslan transla.tion standards and production guidelines. Sydney: Australian Communications Consumer Action Network. (https://accan.org.au/grants/completed-grants/621-what-standards-the-need-for-evidence-based-auslan-translation-standards-and-production-guidelines) (Accessed 2021-11-01.)Hodge, Gabrielle & Trevor Johnston. 2014. Points, depictions, gestures and enact.ment: Partly lexical and non-lexical signs as core elements of single clause-like units in Auslan (Australian Sign Language). Australian Journal of Linguistics 34(2). 262.291. doi:10.1080/07268602.2014.887408Hodge, Gabrielle, Adam Schembri, & Ida Rogers. 2013. Auslan assessment and early intervention strategies project: Report to the Victorian Deaf Education Institute, Department of Education and Early Childhood Development, Government of Victoria. Melbourne: La Trobe University.Hodge, Gabrielle, Kazuki Sekine, Adam Schembri, & Trevor Johnston. 2018. Auslan and Australian English corpus. The Language Archive. Nijmegen: Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics. (https://hdl.handle.net/1839/87342133-fab8-4740-8f81-cd6872e934a1)Hodge, Gabrielle, Kazuki Sekine, Adam Schembri, & Trevor Johnston. 2019. Com.paring signers and speakers: Building a directly comparable corpus of Auslan and Australian English. Corpora 14(1). 63.76. doi:10.3366/cor.2019.0161Holden, Eun-Jung, Gareth Lee, & Robyn Owens. 2005. Australian Sign Language recognition. Machine Vision and Applications 16(5). 312. doi:10.1007/s00138-005-0003-1Hoopman, Sandi R. 2011. We¡¯re Deaf women! We¡¯re sisters!: Exploring the female Deaf voice through community and commensality. Adelaide: University of Ad.elaide. (Honours thesis.)Howard, Damien. 2007. Intercultural communications and conductive hearing loss. First Peoples Child & Family Review 3(4). 96.105. doi:10.7202/1069379ar Hyde, Merv & Des Power. 2006. Some ethical dimensions of cochlear implantation for deaf children and their families. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education 11(1). 102.111. doi:10.1093/deafed/enj009Hyde, Merv & Ren¨¦e Punch. 2011. The modes of communication used by children with cochlear implants and the role of sign in their lives. American Annals of the Deaf 155(5). 535.549. doi:10.1353/aad.2011.0006Iwasaki, Shimako, Meredith Bartlett, Howard Manns, & Louisa Willoughby. 2019. The challenges of multimodality and multi-sensoriality: Methodological issues in analyzing tactile signed interaction. Journal of Pragmatics 143. 215.227. doi:10.1016/j.pragma.2018.05.003Jackson, Suzannah. 2015. Indigenous sign language of Far North Queensland. Learning Communities: International Journal of Learning in Social Contexts 16. 92.99. doi:10.18793/LCJ2015.16.07James, Bentley, Dany Adone, & Elaine Maypilama. 2020a. Decolonizing research methodologies: Insights from research on Indigenous sign languages of Australia. Sign Language Studies 20(2). 201.230. doi:10.1353/sls.2020.0000James, Bentley, Dany Adone, & Elaine Maypilama. 2020b. The illustrated handbook of Yol.u Sign Language of North East Arnhem Land. Melbourne: The Australian Book Connection.Johnston, Trevor. 1987. A preliminary signing dictionary of Australian Sign Lan.guage (Auslan). Adelaide: TAFE National Centre for Research and Development.Johnston, Trevor. 1989a. Auslan dictionary: A dictionary of the sign language of the Australian Deaf Community. Petersham: Deafness Resources Australia.Johnston, Trevor. 1989b. Auslan: The sign language of the Australian Deaf commu.nity. Sydney: University of Sydney. (Doctoral thesis.)Johnston, Trevor. 1996. Function and medium in the forms of linguistic expression found in a sign language. In Edmondson, William & Ronnie Wilbur (eds.), Inter.national review of sign linguistics, vol. 1, 57.94. Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum.Johnston, Trevor. 1997a. Signs of Australia: A new dictionary of Auslan. Sydney: North Rocks Press.Johnston, Trevor. 1997b. Signs of Australia on CD-ROM: A dictionary of Auslan (Version 1.0). Sydney: North Rocks Press.Johnston, Trevor. 2001a. Nouns and verbs in Australian Sign Language: An open and shut case? Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education 6(4). 235.257. doi:10.1093/deafed/6.4.235Johnston, Trevor. 2001b. The lexical database of Auslan (Australian Sign Language). Sign Language & Linguistics 4(1.2). 145.169. doi:10.1075/sll.4.12.11johJohnston, Trevor. 2003. Language standardization and signed language dictionaries. Sign Language Studies 3(4). 431.468. doi:10.1353/sls.2003.0012Johnston, Trevor. 2004. The assessment and achievement of proficiency in a native sign language within a sign bilingual program: The pilot Aus.lan receptive skills test. Deafness & Education International 6(2). 57.81. doi:10.1179/146431504790560582Johnston, Trevor. 2005. In one¡¯s own image: Ethics and the reproduction of deaf.ness. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education 10(4). 426.441. doi:10.1093/deafed/eni040Johnston, Trevor. 2006a. Response to comments. Sign Language Studies 6(2). 225.243. doi:10.1353/sls.2006.0008Johnston, Trevor. 2006b. Sign language: Morphology. In Brown, Keith (ed.), Ency.clopedia of language and linguistics, 2nd edn., 324.324. Oxford: Elsevier.Johnston, Trevor. 2006c. ¡°W(h)ither the deaf community?¡± Population, genetics, and the future of Australian Sign Language. Sign Language Studies 6(2). 137.173.Johnston, Trevor. 2008a. Corpus linguistics and signed languages: No lemmata, no corpus. In Crasborn, Onno, Eleni Efthimiou, Thomas Hanke, Ernst Thouten.hoofd, & Inge Zwitserlood (eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on the Rep.resentation and Processing of Sign Languages: Construction and Exploitation of Sign Language Corpora, 82.87. Paris: European Language Resources Associa.tion.Johnston, Trevor. 2008b. From archive to corpus: Transcription and annotation in the creation of signed language corpora. In Roxas, Rachel Edita (ed.), Proceed.ings of the 22nd Pacific Asia Conference on Language, Information and Compu.tation, 16.29. Manila: De La Salle University.Johnston, Trevor. 2008c. The Auslan archive and corpus. The Endangered Languag.es Archive. (http://hdl.handle.net/2196/00-0000-0000-0000-D7CF-8) (Accessed 2021-11-01.)Johnston, Trevor. 2009. Creating a corpus of Auslan within an Australian national corpus. In Haugh, Michael, Kate Burridge, Jean Mulder, & Pam Peters (eds.), Selected proceedings of the 2008 HCSNet Workshop on Designing the Australian National Corpus, 87.95. Somerville: Cascadilla Proceedings Project.Johnston, Trevor. 2010a. Adding value to, and extracting of value from, a signed language corpus through secondary processing: Implications for annotation sche.mas and corpus creation. In Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on the Representa.tion and Processing of Sign Languages: Corpora and Sign Language Technolo.gies, 137.142. Paris: European Language Resources Association. (https://www.sign-lang.uni-hamburg.de/lrec2010/lrec_cslt_01.pdf) (Accessed 2021-11-01.)Johnston, Trevor. 2010b. From archive to corpus: Transcription and annotation in the creation of signed language corpora. International Journal of Corpus Lin.guistics 15(1). 106.131. doi:10.1075/ijcl.15.1.05johJohnston, Trevor. 2012. Lexical frequency in sign languages. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education 17(2). 163.193. doi:10.1093/deafed/enr036Johnston, Trevor. 2013a. Formational and functional characteristics of pointing signs in a corpus of Auslan (Australian Sign Language): Are the data sufficient to posit a grammatical class of ¡°pronouns¡± in Auslan? Corpus Linguistics and Linguistic Theory 9(1). 109.159. doi:10.1515/cllt-2013-0012Johnston, Trevor. 2013b. Towards a comparative semiotics of pointing ac.tions in signed and spoken languages. Gesture 13(2). 109.142. doi:10.1075/gest.13.2.01joh Johnston, Trevor. 2014. The reluctant oracle: Using strategic annotations to add val.ue to, and extract value from, a signed language corpus. Corpora 9(2). 155.189. doi:10.3366/cor.2014.0056Johnston, Trevor. 2018. A corpus-based study of the role of headshaking in negation in Auslan (Australian Sign Language): Implications for signed language typology. Linguistic Typology 22(2). 185.231. doi:10.1515/lingty-2018-0008Johnston, Trevor. 2019a. Clause constituents, arguments and the question of gram.matical relations in Auslan (Australian Sign Language). Studies in Language 43(4). 941.996. doi:10.1075/sl.18035.joh Johnston, Trevor. 2019b. The Auslan Corpus annotation guidelines (August 2019 Version). Sydney: Macquarie University. (http://www.auslan.org.au/about/anno.tations/) (Accessed 2021-11-01.)Johnston, Trevor & Steve Cassidy. 2008. Auslan Signbank. (http://www.auslan.org.au) (Accessed 2021-09-17.)Johnston, Trevor, Donovan Cresdee, Adam Schembri, & Bencie Woll. 2015. FINISH variation and grammaticalization in a signed language: How far down this well-trodden pathway is Auslan (Australian Sign Language)? Language Variation and Change 27(1). 117.155. doi:10.1017/S0954394514000209Johnston, Trevor & Lindsay Ferrara. 2012. Lexicalization in signed languages: When is an idiom not an idiom. Selected Papers from UK-CLA Meetings 1. 229.248. Johnston, Trevor & Jemina Napier. 2010. Medical Signbank: Bringing Deaf people and linguists together in the process of language development. Sign Language Studies 10(2). 258.275. doi:10.1353/sls.0.0042Johnston, Trevor & Adam Schembri. 1999. On defining lexeme in a signed language. Sign Language & Linguistics 2(2), 115.185. doi:10.1075/sll.2.2.03johJohnston, Trevor & Adam Schembri. 2003. The survival guide to Auslan: A begin.ner¡¯s pocket dictionary of Australian Sign Language. Sydney: North Rocks Press.Johnston, Trevor & Adam Schembri. 2006. Issues in the creation of a digital archive of a signed language. In Barwick, Linda & Nick Thieberger (eds.), Sustainable data from digital fieldwork: Proceedings of the conference held at the University of Sydney, 7.16. Sydney: Sydney University Press.Johnston, Trevor & Adam Schembri. 2007a. Australian Sign Language (Auslan): An introduction to sign language linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511607479Johnston, Trevor & Adam Schembri. 2007b. Testing language description through language documentation, archiving and corpus creation: The case of indicating verbs in the Auslan archive corpus. In Austin, Peter K., Oliver Bond, & David Nathan (eds.), Proceedings of Conference on Language Documentation & Lin.guistic Theory, 145.154. London: SOAS.Johnston, Trevor & Adam Schembri. 2010. Variation, lexicalization and grammati.calization in signed languages. Langage et Soci¨¦t¨¦ 1(131). 19.35. doi:10.3917/ls.131.0019Johnston, Trevor & Adam Schembri. 2013. Corpus analysis of sign languages. In Chapelle, Carol (ed.), The encyclopedia of applied linguistics, 479.501. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. doi:10.1002/9781405198431.wbeal0252 Johnston, Trevor & Jane van Roekel. 2014. Mouth-based non-manual coding sche.ma used in the Auslan corpus: Explanation, application and preliminary results. In Crasborn, Onno, Eleni Efthimiou, Evita Fotinea, Thomas Hanke, Julie Ho.chgesang, Jette Kristoffersen, & Johanna Mesch (eds.), Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on the Representation and Processing of Sign Languages: Beyond the Manual Channel, 81.88. Paris: European Language Resources Association.Johnston, Trevor, Jane van Roekel, & Adam Schembri. 2016. On the convention.alization of mouth actions in Australian Sign Language. Language and Speech 59(1). 3.42. doi:10.1177/0023830915569334Johnston, Trevor, Myriam Vermeerbergen, Adam Schembri, & Lorraine Leeson. 2007. ¡°Real data are messy¡±: Considering cross-linguistic analysis of constituent ordering in Auslan, VGT, and ISL. In Perniss, Pamela, Roland Pfau, & Markus Steinbach (eds.), Visible variation: Comparative studies on sign language struc.ture, 163.206. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. doi:10.1515/9783110198850.163 Jones, Caroline, Eugenie Collyer, Jaidine Fejo, Chantelle Khamchuang, Anita Painter, Lee Rosas, Karen Mattock, Alicia Dunajcik, Paola Escudero, & Anne Dwyer. 2020. Developing a parent vocabulary checklist for young Indigenous children growing up multilingual in the Katherine region of Australia¡¯s Northern Terri.tory. International Journal of Speech-Language Pathology 22(5). 583.590. doi:10.1080/17549507.2020.1718209Jorgensen, Eleanor. 2020. A phonological analysis of sign used in an Australian Western Desert community. Melbourne: The University of Melbourne. (Honours thesis.)Jorgensen, Eleanor, Jennifer Green, & Anastasia Bauer. 2021. Exploring phono.logical aspects of Australian Indigenous sign languages. Languages 6(2). 1.29. doi:10.3390/languages6020081Judd, Julie. 2015. Decisions, decisions: The effects of demand-control schema reflec.tive practice training on ethical decision making by Auslan/English interpreters. Sydney: Macquarie University. (Master¡¯s thesis.)Judd, Julie, Therese Lewis, & Karen Bontempo. 2013. Making mentoring matter: A case study in mentoring educational interpreters. In Winston, Betsy & Robert G. Lee (eds.), Mentorship in sign language interpreting, 161.179. Alexandria: RID Press.Kelly, Barbara. 2006. The development of constructions through early gesture use. In Clark, Eve & Barbara Kelly (eds.), Constructions in acquisition, 11.25. Chicago: CSLI/University of Chicago Press.Kelly, Barbara. 2011. A new look at redundancy in children¡¯s gesture and word combinations. In Arnon, Inbal & Eve Clark (eds.), Experience, variation and gen.eralization: Learning a first language (Trends in Language Acquisition Research 7), 73.90. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company. doi:10.1075/tilar.7.05kelKelly, Barbara. 2014. Temporal synchrony in early multi-modal communication. In Arnon, Inbal, Marisa Casillas, Chigusa Kurumada, & Bruno Estigarribia (eds.), Language in interaction: Studies in honor of Eve V. Clark (Trends in Language Acquisition Research 12), 117.138. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company. doi:10.1075/tilar.12.11kelKendon, Adam. (1988) 2013. Sign languages of Aboriginal Australia: Cultural, se.miotic and communicative perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Kendon, Adam. 2008b. A history of the study of Australian Aboriginal sign languag.es. In McGregor, William (ed.), Encountering Aboriginal languages: Studies in the history of Australian linguistics (Pacific Linguistics 591), 383.402. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics.Kendon, Adam. 2015. Some characteristics of Australian Aboriginal sign languages with hints for further questions for exploration. Learning Communities: Inter.national Journal of Learning in Social Contexts 16(Indigenous Sign Language). 6.13. doi:10.18793/LCJ2015.16.01Korte, Jessica, Leigh Ellen Potter, & Sue Nielsen. 2012. Designing a mobile video game to help young Deaf children learn Auslan. In Proceedings of the 26th An.nual BCS Interaction Specialist Group Conference on People and Computers, 345.350. Swindon: BCS Learning & Development Ltd.Kral, Inge, Jennifer Green, & Elizabeth Marrkilyi Ellis. 2020. i-Tjuma: Ngaanyat.jarra stories from the Western Desert of Central Australia. Perth: UWA Press.Kuder, Anna, Joanna Filipczak, Piotr Mostowski, Pawe. Rutkowski, & Trevor John.ston. 2018. What corpus-based research on negation in Auslan and PJM tells us about building and using sign language corpora. In Calzolari, Nicoletta, Khalid Choukri, Christopher Cieri, Thierry Declerck, Sara Goggi, Koiti Hasida, Hitoshi Isahara, Bente Maegaard, Joseph Mariani, H¨¦l¨¨ne Mazo, Asuncion Moreno, Jan Odijk, Stelios Piperidis, & Takenobu Tokunaga (eds.), Proceedings of LREC 2018 Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, 101.106. Paris: European Language Resources Association. (http://lrec-conf.org/workshops/lrec2018/W1/pdf/18033_W1.pdf) (Accessed 2021-11-01.)Lempert, William. 2018. Palya futures: The social life of Kimberley Aboriginal me.dia. Boulder: University of Colorado. (Doctoral dissertation.)Leneham, Marcel. 2005. The sign language interpreter as translator: Challenging traditional definitions of translation and interpreting. Deaf Worlds: International Journal of Deaf Studies 21(1). 79.101.Leneham, Marcel. 2007. Exploring power and ethnocentrism: In sign language translation. Babel 41(3). 4.12.Leneham, Marcel & Jemina Napier. 2003. Sign language interpreters¡¯ codes of eth.ics: Should we maintain the status quo? Deaf Worlds: International Journal of Deaf Studies 19(2). 78.98.Major, George. 2014. ¡°Sorry, could you explain that?¡± Clarification requests in inter.preted healthcare interaction. In Nicodemus, Brenda & Melanie Metzger (eds.), Investigations in healthcare interpreting, 32.69. Washington, DC: Gallaudet Uni.versity Press.Major, George & Janet Holmes. 2008. How do nurses describe health care proce.dures? Analysing nurse-patient interaction in a hospital ward. Australian Journal of Advanced Nursing 25(4). 58.70.Major, George & Jemina Napier. 2013. Interpreting and knowledge mediation in the healthcare setting: What do we really mean by ¡°accuracy¡±? In Montalt, Vincent & Mark Shuttleworth (eds.), Linguistica Antverpiensia: Translation and knowl.edge mediation in medical and health settings, 207.226. Antwerp: Artesius Uni.versity College. doi:10.52034/lanstts.v11i.304 Major, George & Jemina Napier. 2019. ¡°I¡¯m there sometimes as a just in case¡±: Ex.amining role fluidity in healthcare interpreting. In Ji, Meng, Mustapha Taibi, & Ineke Crezee (eds.), Multicultural health translation, interpreting and communi.cation, 183.204. Philadelphia: Routledge.Major, George, Jemina Napier, Lindsay Ferrara, & Trevor Johnston. 2012. Explor.ing lexical gaps in Australian Sign Language for the purposes of health commu.nication. Communication and Medicine 9(1). 37.47. doi:10.1558/cam.v9i1.37Major, George, Jemina Napier, & Maria Stubbe. 2012. ¡°What happens truly, not textbook!¡±: Using authentic interactions in discourse training for healthcare in.terpreters. In Malcolm, Karen & Laurie Swabey (eds.), In our hands: Educating healthcare interpreters, 27.53. Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Matthews, Nicole, Sherman Young, David Parker, & Jemina Napier. 2010. Looking across the hearing line? Exploring young deaf people¡¯s use of Web 2.0. M/C Jour.nal 13(3). doi:10.5204/mcj.266Maypilama, Elaine & Dany Adone. 2012. Yolngu Sign Language: A sociolinguistic pro.le. In Zeshan, Ulrike & Connie de Vos (eds.), Sign languages in village com.munities: Anthropological and linguistic insights, 401.404.Maypilama, Elaine & Dany Adone. 2013. Yol.u Sign Language: An undocument.ed language of Arnhem Land. Learning Communities: International Journal of Learning in Social Contexts 13. 37.44.Maypilama, Elaine, Dany Adone, & Anastasia Bauer. 2012. Yolngu Sign Language . English dictionary. Cologne: University of Cologne.McKee, Rachel, Adam Schembri, David McKee, & Trevor Johnston. 2011. Vari.able ¡°subject¡± presence in Australian Sign Language and New Zealand Sign Language. Language Variation and Change 23(3). 375.398. doi:10.1017/S0954394511000123Meakins, Felicity, Jennifer Green, & Myfany Turpin. 2018. Understanding linguistic fieldwork. London: Routledge.Montredon, Jacques & Elizabeth Marrkilyi Ellis. 2014. Ngaatjatjarra gestures re.lated to space and time (Working Paper 11). The University of Queensland and Universit¨¦ de Franche-Comt¨¦.Munn, Nancy. (1973) 2016. The Walbiri sand story. In Cohn, Neil (ed.), The visual narrative reader, 231.251. London: Bloomsbury.Murteira, Ana, Paul Sowman, & Lyndsey Nickels. 2019. Taking action in hand: Effects of gesture observation on action verb naming. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience 34(3). 351.364. doi:10.1080/23273798.2018.1552978Nafisi, Julia S. 2014. Gestures and body-movements in the teaching of singing: A survey into current practice in Australia and Germany. Australian Journal of Music Education 1. 77.93. (https://search.informit.org/doi/10.3316/infor.mit.988414409502681) (Accessed 2021-11-01.)Napier, Jemina. 2002a. Linguistic coping strategies of interpreters: An exploration. Journal of Interpretation. 63.92.Napier, Jemina. 2002b. University interpreting: Linguistic issues for consider.ation. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education 7(4). 281.301. doi:10.1093/deafed/7.4.281 Napier, Jemina. 2003. A sociolinguistic analysis of the occurrence and types of omis.sions produced by Australian Sign Language-English interpreters. In Metzger, Melanie, Steven Collins, Valerie Dively, & Risa Shaw (eds.), From topic boundar.ies to omission: Research on interpretation, 99.153. Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Napier, Jemina. 2004a. Interpreting omissions: A new perspective. Interpreting 6(2). 117.142. doi:10.1075/intp.6.2.02napNapier, Jemina. 2004b. Sign language interpreter training, testing, and accreditation: An international comparison. American Annals of the Deaf 149(4). 350.359. doi:10.1353/aad.2005.0007Napier, Jemina. 2005a. Linguistic features and strategies of interpreting: From re.search to education to practice. In Marschark, Marc, Rico Peterson, & Eliza.beth Winston (eds.), Interpreting and interpreter education: Directions for re.search and practice, 84.111. New York: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof/9780195176940.003.0004Napier, Jemina. 2005b. Making learning accessible for sign language interpret.ers: A process of change. Educational Action Research 13(4). 505.524. doi:10.1080/09650790500200302Napier, Jemina. 2005c. Teaching interpreting students to identify omission potential. In Roy, Cynthia (ed.), Advances in teaching sign language interpreters, 2nd edn., 123.137. Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Napier, Jemina. 2005d. Training sign language interpreters in Australia: An innova.tive approach. Babel 51(3). 207.223. doi:10.1075/babel.51.3.01napNapier, Jemina. 2006a. Comparing language contact phenomena between Auslan-English interpreters and deaf Australians: A preliminary study. In Lucas, Ceil (ed.), Multilingualism and sign languages: From the Great Plains to Australia, 39.78. Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Napier, Jemina. 2006b. Educating signed language interpreters in Australia: A blend.ed approach. In Roy, Cynthia B. (ed.), New approaches to interpreter education, 67.103. Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Napier, Jemina. 2006c. Effectively teaching discourse to sign language in.terpreting students. Language, Culture and Curriculum 19(3). 251.265. doi:10.1080/07908310608668766Napier, Jemina. 2006d. The new kid on the block: Mentoring sign language inter.preters in Australia. Journal of Interpretation. 25.46.Napier, Jemina. 2007. Cooperation in interpreter-mediated monologic talk. Dis.course & Communication 1(4). 407.432. doi:10.1177/1750481307082206Napier, Jemina. 2010. A case study of the use of storytelling as a pedagogical tool for teaching interpreting students. The Interpreter & Translator Trainer 10(1). 1.32. doi:10.1080/1750399X.2010.10798795Napier, Jemina. 2011a. ¡°It¡¯s not what they say but the way they say it.¡± A content analysis of interpreter and consumer perceptions of signed language interpret.ing in Australia. International Journal of the Sociology of Language 2011(207). 59.87. doi:10.1515/ijsl.2011.003Napier, Jemina. 2011b. Signed language interpreting. In Malmkj.r, Kirsten & Kevin Windle (eds.), The Oxford handbook of translation studies, 353.372. Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199239306.013.0025Napier, Jemina. 2012a. Exploring themes in stakeholder perspectives of video re.mote interpreting in court. In Kellett Bidoli, Cynthia (ed.), Interpreting across genres: Multiple research perspectives, 219.254. Trieste: EUT Edizioni Universit¨¤ di Trieste.Napier, Jemina. 2012b. Here or there? An assessment of video remote signed lan.guage interpreter-mediated interaction in court. In Braun, Sabine & Judith Taylor (eds.), Videoconference and remote interpreting in criminal proceedings, 167.214. Antwerp: Intersentia.Napier, Jemina. 2013. ¡°You get that vibe¡±: A pragmatic analysis of clarification and communicative accommodation in legal video remote interpreting. In Meurant, Laurence, Aur¨¦lie Sinte, Mieke van Herreweghe, & Myriam Vermeerbergen (eds.), Sign language research uses and practices: Crossing views on theoretical and applied sign language linguistics, 85.110. Nijmegen: Ishara Press.Napier, Jemina. 2016. Linguistic coping strategies in sign language interpreting, 2nd edn. Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Napier, Jemina. 2017. Not just child¡¯s play: Exploring bilingualism and language brokering as a precursor to the development of expertise as a professional sign language interpreter. In Antonini, Rachele, Letizia Cirillo, Linda Rossato, & Ira Torresi (eds.), Non-professional interpreting and translation: State of the art and future of an emerging field of research, 381.409. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. doi:10.1075/btl.129.19nap Napier, Jemina & Robert Adam. 2002. A comparative linguistic analysis of Auslan and BSL interpreting. Deaf Worlds: International Journal of Deaf Studies 18(1). 22.31.Napier, Jemina & Karin Banna. 2016. Walking a fine line . the legal system and sign language interpreters: Roles and responsibilities. Journal of Applied Linguistics and Professional Practice 13(1.3). 233.253. doi:10.1558/japl.31859Napier, Jemina & Roz Barker. 2003. A demographic survey of Australian Sign Lan.guage interpreters. Australian Journal of Education of the Deaf 9. 19.32.Napier, Jemina & Roz Barker. 2004a. Accessing university education: Perceptions, preferences, and expectations for interpreting by deaf students. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education 9(2). 228.238. doi:10.1093/deafed/enh024Napier, Jemina & Roz Barker. 2004b. Sign language interpreting: The relationship between metalinguistic awareness and the production of interpreting omissions. Sign Language Studies 4(4). 369.393.Napier, Jemina, Andy Carmichael, & Andrew Wiltshire. 2008. Look-pause-nod: A linguistic case study of a Deaf professional and interpreters working together. In Hauser, Peter, Karen Finch, & Angela Hauser (eds.), Deaf professionals and des.ignated interpreters: A new paradigm, 22.42. Washington, DC: Gallaudet Uni.versity Press.Napier, Jemina & Andy Cornes. 2004. The dynamic roles of interpreters and thera.pists. In Austen, Sally & Susan Crocker (eds.), Deafness in mind: Working psy.chologically with deaf people across the lifespan, 161.179. London: Whurr Pub.lishers.Napier, Jemina & Della Goswell. 2013. Signed language interpreting profession. In Chapelle, Carol (ed.), The encyclopedia of applied linguistics, 1.7. London: Blackwell Publishing. Napier, Jemina & Michael Kidd. 2013. English literacy as a barrier to health care information for deaf people who use Auslan. Australian Family Physician 42(12). 896.899.Napier, Jemina & Lorraine Leeson. 2016. Sign language in action. London: Palgrave Macmillan.Napier, Jemina, Greg Leigh, & Sharon Nann. 2007. Teaching sign language to hear.ing parents of deaf children: An action research process. Deafness & Education International 9(2). 83.100. doi:10.1179/146431507790560020Napier, Jemina & Marcel Leneham. 2011. ¡°It was difficult to manage the commu.nication¡±: Testing the feasibility of video remote signed language interpreting in court. Journal of Interpretation 21(1). 53.62.Napier, Jemina, George Major, & Lindsay Ferrara. 2011. Medical Signbank: A cure-all for the aches and pains of medical sign language interpreting? In Leeson, Lor.raine, Svenja Wurm, & Myriam Vermeerbergen (eds.), Signed language interpret.ing: Preparation, practice and performance, 111.137. Manchester: St. Jerome.Napier, Jemina, George Major, Lindsay Ferrara, & Trevor Johnston. 2015. Medical Signbank as a model for sign language planning? A review of community engage.ment. Current Issues in Language Planning 16(3). 279.295. doi:10.1080/14664208.2014.972536Napier, Jemina & Alastair McEwin. 2015. Do deaf people have the right to serve as jurors in Australia? Alternative Law Journal 40(1). 23.27. doi:10.1177/1037969X1504000106Napier, Jemina, Rachel McKee, & Della Goswell. 2006. Sign language interpret.ing: Theory and practice in Australia and New Zealand. Annandale, New South Wales: The Federation Press.Napier, Jemina, Rachel McKee, & Della Goswell. 2010. Sign language interpreting: Theory and practice in Australia and New Zealand, 2nd edn. Sydney: The Federa.tion Press. Napier, Jemina, Rachel McKee, & Della Goswell. 2018. Sign language interpreting: Theory and practice in Australia and New Zealand, 3rd edn. Leichhardt, New South Wales: The Federation Press.Napier, Jemina & Meg Rohan. 2007. An invitation to dance: Deaf consumers¡¯ per.ceptions of signed language interpreters and interpreting. In Metzger, Melanie & Earl Fleetwood (eds.), Translation, sociolinguistic, & consumer issues in inter.preting, 159.203. Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Napier, Jemina, Meg Rohan, & Helen Slatyer. 2005. Perceptions of bilingual compe.tence and preferred language direction in Auslan/English interpreters. Journal of Applied Linguistics and Professional Practice 2(2). 185.218. doi:10.1558/japl.v2.i2.185Napier, Jemina, Debra Russell, Sandra Hale, David Spencer, & Mehera San Roque. In press. Training legal interpreters to work with deaf jurors. In Brunson, Jeremy (ed.), Teaching legal interpreting. Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Napier, Jemina & Joe Sabolcec. 2014. Direct, interpreter-mediated or translated? A qualitative study of access to preventive and ongoing healthcare information for Australian deaf people. In Nicodemus, Brenda & Melanie Metzger (eds.) Inves.tigations in healthcare interpreting, 233.276. Washington, DC: Gallaudet Uni.versity Press.Napier, Jemina & David Spencer. 2007. A sign of the times: Deaf jurors and the potential for pioneering law reform. Reform: A Journal of National and Interna.tional Law Reform (90). 35.37.Napier, Jemina & David Spencer. 2008. Guilty or not guilty? An investigation of deaf jurors¡¯ access to court proceedings via sign language interpreting. In Russell, Debra & Sandra Hale (eds.), Interpreting in legal settings, 72.122. Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Napier, Jemina & David Spencer. 2017. Jury instructions: Comparing hearing and deaf jurors¡¯ comprehension via direct or mediated communication. International Journal of Speech, Language, and the Law 24(1). 1.29. doi:10.1558/ijsll.30878Napier, Jemina, David Spencer, Sandra Hale, Mehera San Roque, Gerry Shearim, & Debra Russell. 2019. Changing the international justice landscape: Perspec.tives on deaf citizenship and jury service. Sign Language Studies 19(2). 240.266. doi:10.1353/SLS.2018.0034yNaveda, Luiz & Marc Leman. 2010. The spatiotemporal representation of dance and music gestures using topological gesture analysis. Music Perception: An Interdisci.plinary Journal 28(1). 93.111. doi:10.1525/mp.2010.28.1.93 Nekrasova, Elizaveta. 2017. Backchannels in Australian Sign Language. Melbourne: University of Melbourne. (Master¡¯s thesis.)Nelson, Kate, Inise Tawaketini, Ruth Spencer, & Della Goswell. 2009. Isa Lei: Inter.preter training in Fiji. In Napier, Jemina (ed.), Signed language interpreter educa.tion and training: A world survey (Interpreter Education 4). Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Nevile, Maurice. 2002. Coordinating talk and non-talk activity in the airline cock.pit. Australian Review of Applied Linguistics 25(1). 131.146. doi:10.1075/aral.25.1.07nev Ngo, Thu. 2018. Gesture as transduction of characterisation in children¡¯s literature animation adaptation. Australian Journal of Language and Literacy 41(1). 30.43.Nicodemus, Brenda, Laurie Swabey, Lorraine Leeson, Jemina Napier, Giulia Petitta, & Marty Taylor. 2017. A cross-linguistic analysis of fingerspelling production by sign language interpreters. Sign Language Studies 17(2). 143.171. doi:10.1353/sls.2017.0000Parton, Katharine. 2014. Epistemic stance in orchestral interaction. Social Semiotics 24(4). 402.419. doi:10.1080/10350330.2014.929389Parton, Katharine. 2020. Situated, embodied, distributed: Interaction and cognition in the orchestra. Melbourne: The University of Melbourne. (Doctoral thesis.)Pearce, Tamara & Jemina Napier. 2010. Mentoring: A vital learning tool for inter.preter graduates. International Journal of Interpreter Education 2. 58.75.Perera, Asanka, Yee Wei Law, & Javaan Chahl. 2019. UAV-Gesture: A dataset for UAV control and gesture recognition. In Leal-Taix¨¦, Laura & Stefan Roth (eds.), European Conference on Computer Vision 2018, 117.128. Munich: Springer.Potter, Leigh Ellen, Jake Araullo, & Lewis Carter. 2013. The Leap Motion con.troller: A view on sign language. In Shen, Haifeng, Ross Smith, Jeni Paay, Paul Calder, & Theodor Wyeld (eds.), Proceedings of the 25th Australian Comput.er-Human Interaction Conference: Augmentation, Application, Innovation, Collaboration, 175.178. New York: Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/2541016.2541072Potter, Leigh Ellen, Jessica Korte, & Sue Nielsen. 2012. Sign my world: Lessons learned from prototyping sessions with young deaf children. In Farrell, Vivienne, Graham Farrell, Caslon Chua, Weidong Huang, Raj Vasa, & Clinton Woodward (eds.), Pro.ceedings of the 24th Australian Computer-Human Interaction Conference, Mel.bourne, 501.504. New York: ACM Press. doi:10.1145/2414536.2414613Power, Desmond. 2013. Australian Aboriginal deaf people and Aboriginal sign lan.guage. Sign Language Studies 13(2). 264.277. doi:10.1353/sls.2013.0000Power, Desmond, Merv Hyde, & Greg Leigh. 2008. Learning English from signed English: An impossible task? American Annals of the Deaf 153(1). 37.47. doi:10.1353/aad.0.0008Power, Desmond & Greg Leigh. 2000. Principles and practices of literacy develop.ment for deaf learners: A historical overview. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education 5(1). 3.8. doi:10.1093/deafed/5.1.3Quinn, Sara & Evan Kidd. 2019. Symbolic play promotes non-verbal communica.tive exchange in infant.caregiver dyads. British Journal of Developmental Psy.chology 37(1). 33.50. doi:10.1111/bjdp.12251Quinto-Pozos, David & Robert Adam. 2013. Sign language contact. In Bayley, Robert, Richard Cameron, & Ceil Lucas (eds.), The Oxford handbook of so.ciolinguistics, 379.400. Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/oxford.hb/9780199744084.013.0019Quinto-Pozos, David & Robert Adam. 2015. Bilingualism and language contact. In Schembri, Adam & Ceil Lucas (eds.), The sociolinguistics of sign languages, 29.60. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Quinto-Pozos, David & Robert Adam. 2020. Language contact considering sign lan.guage. In Grant, Anthony (ed.), The Oxford handbook of language contact. New York: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199945092.013.40Rose, Miranda, Anastasia Raymer, Lucie Lanyon, & Michelle Attard. 2013. A sys.tematic review of gesture treatments for post-stroke aphasia. Aphasiology 27(9). 1090.1127. doi:10.1080/02687038.2013.805726Rose, Miranda & Grace Sussmilch. 2008. The effects of semantic and gesture treat.ments on verb retrieval and verb use in aphasia. Aphasiology 22(7.8). 691.706. doi:10.1080/02687030701800800Saxton-Barney, Jody. 2010. Submission to the Senate Committee Inquiry into Hear.ing Health in Australia, 1.14.Schembri, Adam. 2002. Issues in the analysis of polycomponential verbs in Aus.tralian Sign Language (Auslan). Sydney: University of Sydney. (Doctoral thesis.) (http://hdl.handle.net/2123/6272)Schembri, Adam. 2003. Rethinking ¡°classifiers¡± in signed languages. In Emmorey, Karen (ed.), Perspectives on classifier constructions in sign languages, 13.44. Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Schembri, Adam, Kearsy Cormier, Trevor Johnston, David McKee, Rachel McKee, & Bencie Woll. 2010. Sociolinguistic variation in British, Australian and New Zealand Sign Languages. In Brentari, Diane (ed.), Sign languages, 476.498. Cam.bridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511712203.022 Schembri, Adam, Jordan Fenlon, Kearsy Cormier, & Trevor Johnston. 2018. Socio.linguistic typology and sign languages. Frontiers in Psychology 9. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00200Schembri, Adam & Trevor Johnston. 2007. Sociolinguistic variation in the use of fingerspelling in Australian Sign Language: A pilot study. Sign Language Studies 7(3). 319.347. doi:10.1353/sls.2007.0019Schembri, Adam & Trevor Johnston. 2012. Sociolinguistic aspects of variation and change. In Pfau, Roland, Markus Steinbach, & Bencie Woll (eds.), Sign language: An international handbook, 788.816. Berlin: De Gruyter.Schembri, Adam & Trevor Johnston. 2013. Sociolinguistic variation and change in sign languages. In Bayley, Robert, Richard Cameron, & Ceil Lucas (eds.), The Oxford handbook of sociolinguistics, 503.524. Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199744084.013.0025Schembri, Adam, Trevor Johnston, & Della Goswell. 2006. NAME Dropping: Loca.tion variation in Australian Sign Language. In Lucas, Ceil (ed.), Multilingualism and sign languages: From the Great Plains to Australia, 121.156. Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Schembri, Adam, Caroline Jones, & Denis Burnham. 2005. Comparing action ges.tures and classifier verbs of motion: Evidence from Australian Sign Language, Taiwan Sign Language, and nonsigners¡¯ gestures without speech. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education 10(3). 272.290. doi:10.1093/deafed/eni029Schembri, Adam & Ceil Lucas (eds.) 2015. Sociolinguistics and deaf communities. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Schembri, Adam, David McKee, Rachel McKee, Sara Pivac, Trevor Johnston, & Della Goswell. 2009. Phonological variation and change in Australian and New Zealand Sign Languages: The location variable. Language Variation and Change 21(2). 193.231. doi:10.1017/S0954394509990081Schembri, Adam, Gillian Wigglesworth, Trevor Johnston, Greg Leigh, Robert Adam, & Roz Barker. 2002. Issues in development of the test battery for Australian Sign Language morphology and syntax. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education 7(1). 18.40. doi:10.1093/deafed/7.1.18Sekine, Kazuki, Miranda Rose, Abby Foster, Michelle Attard, & Lucette Lanyon. 2013. Gesture production patterns in aphasic discourse: In-depth description and preliminary predictions. Aphasiology 27(9). 1031.1049. doi:10.1080/02687038.2013.803017Sparrow, Robert. 2005. Defending Deaf culture: The case of cochlear implants. The Journal of Political Philosophy 13(2). 135.152. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9760.2005.00217.x Sparrow, Robert. 2010. Implants and ethnocide: Learning from the co.chlear implant controversy. Disability & Society 25(4). 455.466. doi:10.1080/09687591003755849Spencer, David, Mehera San Roque, Sandra Hale, & Jemina Napier. 2017. The High Court considers participation of deaf people in jury duty. LSJ, May 1. (https://lsj.com.au/articles/the-high-court-considers-participation-of-deaf-people-in-jury-duty/) (Accessed 2021-09-17.)Spencer, David, Mehera San Roque, Jemina Napier, & Sandra Hale. 2017. Justice is blind as long as it isn¡¯t Deaf: Excluding deaf people from jury duty . an Austra.lian human rights breach. Australian Journal of Human Rights 23(3). 332.350. doi:10.1080/1323238X.2017.1392479Tabensky, Alexis. 2002. Gestures in oral presentations by second language learners. (Paper presented at Gesture: The Living Medium, Austin, 5.8 June.)Thornton, Darlene, Susannah Macready, & Patti Levitzke-Gray. 2014. Written into history: The lives of Australian Deaf leaders. In Snoddon, Kristin (ed.), Telling Deaf lives: Agents of change, 93.101. Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Tipton, Frank. 2008. ¡°Thumbs.up is a rude gesture in Australia¡±: The presentation of culture in international business textbooks. Critical Perspectives on Interna.tional Business 4(1). 7.24. doi:10.1108/17422040810849730Wallis, Bernadette Therese. 2016. The silent book: A Deaf family and the disappear.ing Australian-Irish Sign Language. Melbourne: Missionary Sisters of Service.Wang, Jihong. 2013a. Bilingual working memory capacity of professional Auslan/English interpreters. Interpreting 15(2). 139.167. doi:10.1075/intp.15.2.01wanWang, Jihong. 2013b. Working memory and signed language interpreting. Sydney: Macquarie University. (Doctoral thesis.)Wang, Jihong. 2016. The relationship between working memory capacity and simul.taneous interpreting performance: A mixed methods study on professional Aus.lan/English interpreters. Interpreting 18(1). 1.33. doi:10.1075/intp.18.1.01wanWang, Jihong. 2020. Striking a cognitive balance: Processing time in Auslan-to-Eng.lish simultaneous interpreting. In Hunt, Danielle & Emily Shaw (eds.), The Sec.ond International Symposium on Signed Language Interpretation and Transla.tion Research: Selected papers, 108.131. Washington, DC: Gallaudet University Press.Wang, Jihong. 2021. Simultaneous interpreting from a signed language into a spoken language: Quality, cognitive overload & strategies. Philadelphia: Routledge. Wang, Jihong & Jemina Napier. 2013. Signed language working memory capacity of signed language interpreters and deaf signers. Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education 18(2). 271.286. doi:10.1093/deafed/ens068Wang, Jihong & Jemina Napier. 2014. Measuring bilingual working memory capaci.ty of professional Auslan/English interpreters: A comparison of two scoring meth.ods. The Interpreters¡¯ Newsletter 19. 45.62. doi:10.13137/1591-4127/10649Wang, Jihong & Jemina Napier. 2015. Directionality in signed language interpreting. Meta 60(3). 518.541. doi:10.7202/1036141arWang, Jihong, Jemina Napier, Della Goswell, & Andy Carmichael. 2015. The de.sign and application of rubrics to assess signed language interpreting perfor.mance. The Interpreter and Translator Trainer 9(1). 83.103. doi:10.1080/1750399X.2015.1009261West, Melina, Anthony Angwin, David Copland, Wendy Arnott, & Nicole Nel.son. 2020. Cross-modal emotion recognition and autism-like traits in typical.ly developing children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 191. 1.19. doi:10.1016/j.jecp.2019.104737Wilkins, David P. 2003. Why pointing with the index finger is not a universal (in so.ciocultural and semiotic terms). In Kita, Sotaro (ed.), Pointing: Where language, culture, & cognition meet, 171.215. Mahwah: Erlbaum.Wilkins, David P. (1997) 2016. Alternative representations of space: Arrernte narra.tives in sand. In Cohn, Neil (ed.), The visual narrative reader, 253.280. London: Bloomsbury.Willoughby, Louisa. 2008. Catering to a diverse community: A report on the situa.tion and needs of deaf people from migrant backgrounds living in Victoria. Mel.bourne: The Victorian Deaf Society & Victorian Multicultural Commission.Willoughby, Louisa. 2009a. Education and employment outcomes for Victorian sign language users: Analysis from the 2006 census. Melbourne: The Victorian Deaf Society.Willoughby, Louisa. 2009b. Language choice in migrant families with deaf children: A case study approach. In Chen, Honglin & Ken Cruickshank (eds.), Making a difference: Challenges for applied linguistics, 316.327. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.Willoughby, Louisa. 2009c. Review of the smoke alarm subsidy scheme for Deaf and hard of hearing Victorians. Melbourne: The Victorian Deaf Society.Willoughby, Louisa. 2009d. The distribution of NSW sign language users: Analysis from the 1996 and 2006 census. Sydney: The Deaf Society of NSW.Willoughby, Louisa. 2009e. The distribution of Tasmania¡¯s signing populations: Analysis from the 1996 and 2006 census. Melbourne: The Victorian Deaf Society.Willoughby, Louisa. 2011a. Aged care support for deaf Victorians. Melbourne: The Victorian Deaf Society.Willoughby, Louisa. 2011b. Sign language users¡¯ education and employment levels: Keeping pace with changes in the general Australian population? Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education 16(3). 401.413. doi:10.1093/deafed/enq067Willoughby, Louisa. 2012a. Language maintenance and the deaf child. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 33(6). 605.618. doi:10.1080/01434632.2012.670242Willoughby, Louisa. 2012b. Review of Auslan training and delivery in Victoria: Sum.mary report for centre of excellence for students who are Deaf and hard of hear.ing. Melbourne: Grant Thornton & NMIT.Willoughby, Louisa. 2013. The distribution of Victoria¡¯s sign language users: Analy.sis from the 2001, 2006 and 2011 census. Melbourne: The Victorian Deaf Society.Willoughby, Louisa. 2014. Unpacking barriers to quality care for Deaf people in residential aged care facilities. Disability & Society 29(2). 173.183. doi:10.1080/09687599.2013.776492Willoughby, Louisa. 2015a. Deaf children and youth from refugee backgrounds: Pressing issues and possible solutions. In Crock, Mary (ed.), Creating new fu.tures: Settling children and youth from refugee backgrounds, 197.212. Alexan.dria, New South Wales: The Federation Press.Willoughby, Louisa. 2015b. The role of professional advice in shaping language choice in migrant-background families with deaf children. In Hajek, John & Yvette Slaughter (eds.), Challenging the monolingual mindset, 149.161. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.Willoughby, Louisa, Shimako Iwasaki, Meredith Bartlett, & Howard Manns. 2018. Tactile sign languages. In .stman, Jan-Ola & Jef Verschueren (eds.), Handbook of pragmatics, 239.258. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing. doi:10.1075/hop.21.tac1 Willoughby, Louisa, Stephanie Linder, Kirsten Ellis, & Julie Fisher. 2015. Errors and feedback in the beginner Auslan classroom. Sign Language Studies 15(3). 322.347. doi:10.1353/sls.2015.0009Willoughby, Louisa, Howard Manns, Shimako Iwasaki, & Meredith Bartlett. 2014. Misunderstanding and repair in tactile Auslan. Sign Language Studies 14(4). 419.443. doi:10.1353/sls.2014.0014Willoughby, Louisa, Howard Manns, Shimako Iwasaki, & Meredith Bartlett. 2019. Are you trying to be funny? Communicating humour in deafblind conversations. Discourse Studies 21(5). 584.602. doi:10.1177/1461445619846704Willoughby, Louisa, Howard Manns, Shimako Iwasaki, & Meredith Bartlett. 2020. From seeing to feeling: How do deafblind people adapt visual sign languages? In Allan, Keith (ed.), Dynamics of language changes: Looking within and across languages, 235.252. Singapore: Springer.Willoughby, Louisa & Cathy Sell. 2019. Studying a sign language: What are hear.ing adults doing outside of class? Sign Language Studies 19(3). 453.478. doi:10.1353/sls.2019.0004Jennifer Greenjag@unimelb.edu.au orcid.org/0000-0001-9509-1547Gabrielle Hodgegabrielle.hodge@anu.edu.au orcid.org/0000-0001-8677-6149Barbara Kellyb.kelly@unimelb.edu.au orcid.org/0000-0002-0085-4917Licensed under Creative CommonsAttribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International	                                    E-ISSN 1934-5275