See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/348379825 User-friendly automatic transcription of low-resource languages: Plugging ESPnet into Elpis Preprint íñ December 2020 CITATIONS READS 0 122 14 authors, including: Laurent Besacier Guillaume Jacques Universit¿ª Grenoble Alpes French National Centre for Scientific Research 403 PUBLICATIONS 6,312 CITATIONS 175 PUBLICATIONS 1,631 CITATIONS Nathan W. Hill Trinity College Dublin 135 PUBLICATIONS 754 CITATIONS All content following this page was uploaded by Nathan W. Hill on 27 April 2021. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. arXiv:2101.03027v2 [cs.CL] 22 Feb 2021 User-Friendly Automatic Transcription of Low-Resource Languages: Plugging ESPnet into Elpis Oliver Adams a , Benjamin Galliot b , Guillaume Wisniewski c , Nicholas Lambourne d e , Ben Foley d e , Rahasya Sanders-Dwyer d e , Janet Wiles d e , Alexis Michaud b , S¿ªverine Guillaume b , Laurent Besacier f , Christopher Cox g , Katya Aplonova h , Guillaume Jacques i , Nathan Hill j a Atos zData, United States of America b Langues et Civilisations ¿ñ Tradition Orale (LACITO), CNRS-Sorbonne Nouvelle, France c Universit¿ª Paris, Laboratoire de Linguistique Formelle (LLF), CNRS, France d The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia e ARC Centre of Excellence for the Dynamics of Language (CoEDL), Australia f Laboratoire dí»Informatique de Grenoble (LIG), CNRS-Universit¿ª Grenoble Alpes, France g University of Alberta, Canada h Langage, Langues et Civilisation dí»Afrique (LLACAN), CNRS-INALCO, France i Centre de Recherches Linguistiques sur lí»Asie Orientale (CRLAO), CNRS-EHESS, France j School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London, United Kingdom oliver.adams@gmail.com, b.g01lyon@gmail.com, guillaume.wisniewski@u-paris.fr, {n.lambourne|b.foley|uqrsand5|j.wiles}@uq.edu.au, {alexis.michaud|severine.guillaume}@cnrs.fr, laurent.besacier@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr, cox.christopher@gmail.com, {aplooon|rgyalrongskad}@gmail.com, nh36@soas.ac.uk Abstract This paper reports on progress integrating the speech recognition toolkit ESPnet into Elpis, a web front-end originally designed to provide access to the Kaldi automatic speech recogni.tion toolkit. The goal of this work is to make end-to-end speech recognition models avail.able to language workers via a user-friendly graphical interface. Encouraging results are reported on (i) development of an ESPnet recipe for use in Elpis, with preliminary results on data sets previously used for training acous.tic models with the Persephone toolkit along with a new data set that had not previously been used in speech recognition, and (ii) in.corporating ESPnet into Elpis along with UI enhancements and a CUDA-supported Dock.er.le. 1 Introduction Transcription of speech is an important part of lan.guage documentation, and yet speech recognition technology has not been widely harnessed to aid linguists. Despite revolutionary progress in the performance of speech recognition systems in the past decade (Hinton et al., 2012; Hannun et al., 2014; Zeyer et al., 2018; Hadian et al., 2018; Ra.vanelli et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2020), including its application to low-resource languages (Besacier et al., 2014; Blokland et al., 2015; van Esch et al., 2019; Hjortnaes et al., 2020), these advances are yet to play a common role in language documenta.tion work.ows. Speech recognition software often requires effective command line skills and a rea.sonably detailed understanding of the underlying modeling. People involved in language documen.tation, language description, and language revital.ization projects (this includes, but is not limited to, linguists who carry out .eldwork) seldom have such knowledge. Thus, the tools are largely inac.cessible by many people who would bene.t from their use. Elpis1 is a tool created to allow language work.ers with minimal computational experience to build their own speech recognition models and au.tomatically transcribe audio (Foley et al., 2018, 2019). Elpis uses the Kaldi2 automatic speech recognition (ASR) toolkit (Povey et al., 2011) as its backend. Kaldi is a mature, widely used and well-supported speech recognition toolkit which supports a range of hidden Markov model based speech recognition models. 1https://github.com/CoEDL/elpis 2https://github.com/kaldi-asr/kaldi In this paper we report on the ongoing integra.tion of ESPnet3 into Elpis as an alternative to the current Kaldi system. We opted to integrate ESP-net (Watanabe et al., 2018) as it is a widely used and actively developed tool with state-of-the-art end-to-end neural network models. By supporting ESPnet in Elpis, we aim to bring a wider range of advances in speech recognition to a broad group of users, and provide alternative model options that may better suit some data circumstances, such as an absence of a pronunciation lexicon. In the rest of this paper, we describe changes to the Elpis toolkit to support the new backend, and preliminary experiments applying our ESPnet recipe to several datasets from a language docu.mentation context. Finally, we discuss plans going forward with this project. 2 Related Work Automatic phonetic/phonemic transcription in language documentation As a subset of speech recognition research, work has been done in ap.plying speech recognition systems to the very low-resource phonemic data scenarios typical in the language documentation context. Encourag.ing results capitalizing on the advances in speech recognition technology for automatic phonemic transcription in a language documentation context were reported by Adams et al. (2018). Their work used a neural network architecture with connec.tionist temporal classi.cation (Graves et al., 2006) for phonemic (including tonal) transcription. A command line toolkit was released called Perse.phone. To assess the reproducibility of the re.sults on other languages, experiments were ex.tended beyond the Chatino, Na and Tsuutí»ina data sets, to a sample of languages from the Pangloss Collection, an online archive of under-resourced languages (Michailovsky et al., 2014). The re.sults con.rmed that end-to-end models for au.tomatic phonemic transcription deliver promis.ing performance, and also suggested that prepro.cessing tasks can to a large extent be automated, thereby increasing the attractiveness of the tool for language documentation work.ows (Wisniewski et al., 2020). Another effort in this space is Al.losaurus (Li et al., 2020), which leverages mul.tilingual models for phonetic transcription and jointly models language independent phones and language-dependent phonemes. This stands as a 3https://github.com/espnet/espnet promising step towards effective universal pho.netic recognition, which would be of great value in the language documentation process. User-friendly speech recognition interfaces Since such research tools do not have user friendly interfaces, efforts have been put into making these tools accessible to wider audience of users. The authors of Allosaurus provide a web interface on.line.4 To integrate Persephone into the language documentation work.ow, a plugin, Persephone-ELAN,5 was developed for ELAN,6 a piece of software that is widely used for annotation in lan.guage documentation (Cox, 2019). Meanwhile, Elpis is a toolkit that provides a user-friendly front-end to the Kaldi speech recog.nition system. The interface steps the user through the process of preparing language recordings us.ing existing ELAN transcription .les, training a model and applying the model to obtain a hypoth.esis orthographic transcription for untranscribed speech recordings. 3 Bringing ESPnet to Elpis ESPnet is an end-to-end neural network-based speech recognition toolkit. Developed with Py.torch (Paszke et al., 2019) in a research context, the tool satis.es three desiderata for our purposes: (a) it is easy to modify training recipes, which con.sist of collections of scripts and con.guration .les that make it easy to perform training and decoding by calling a wrapper script. These recipes describe a wide range of the hyperparameters and architec.ture choices of the model; (b) it is actively devel.oped, with frequent integration of the latest ad.vances in end-to-end speech recognition; and (c) it supports Kaldi-style data formatting, which makes it a natural end-to-end counterpart to Kaldi back-end that was already supported in Elpis. These points make it a more appealing candidate back-end than Persephone, primarily due to ESPnetí»s larger developer base. 3.1 Development of an ESPnet recipe for Elpis One goal of the integration is to create a default ESPnet recipe for Elpis to use, that performs well across a variety of languages and with the small 4https://www.dictate.app 5https://github.com/coxchristopher/ persephone-elan 6https://archive.mpi.nl/tla/elan Figure 1: Training stages of the Elpis interface. Notice the choice of backend in the upper right-hand corner. amount and type of data typically available in a language documentation context. To get a sense of how easy it would be us.ing ESPnet to get similar performance as previ.ously attained we applied it to the single-speaker Na and Chatino datasets as used in Adams et al. (2018) (see Table 1, which includes other details of the datasets used, including the amount of train.ing data). We report character error rate (CER) rather than phoneme error rate (PER) because it is general, does not require a subsequent language-speci.c post-processing step, and also captures characters that a linguist might want transcribed that arení»t strictly phonemic. Because of minor differences in the training sets, their preprocess.ing, and metrics used, these numbers are not in.tended to be directly comparable with previous work. While these results are not directly compa.rable to the results they reported, the performance was good enough to con.rm that integrating ES-Pnet was preferable to Persephone. We do no language-speci.c preprocessing, though the Elpis interface allows the user to de.ne a character set for which instances of those characters will be re.moved from the text. For the Na data and the Ja.phug data in íý4, the Pangloss XML format is con.verted to ELAN XML using a XSLT-based tool, Pangloss-Elpis.7 7gitlab.com/lacito/pangloss-elpis While we did not aggressively tune hyperpa.rameters and architecture details, they do have a substantial impact on performance and computa.tional requirements. Owing to the small datasets and limited computational resources of many of the machines that Elpis may run on, we used a relatively small neural network. In the future we aim to grow a representative suite of evaluation languages from a language documentation setting for further tuning to determine what hyperparam.eters and architecture best suit different scenarios. Though we aim for a recipe that does well across a range of possible language documentation data circumstances, the best architecture and hyperpa.rameters will vary depending on the characteris.tics of the input dataset. Rather than have the user .ddle with such hyperparameters directly, which would undermine the user-friendliness of the tool, there is potential to automatically adjust the hyper-parameters of the model on the basis of the data supplied to the model. For example, the parame.ters could be automatically set depending on the number of speakers in the ELAN .le and the total amount of speech. The architecture we used for these experiments is a hybrid CTC-attention model (Watanabe et al., 2017b) with a 3-layer BiLSTM encoder and a sin.gle layer decoder. We use a hidden size of 320 and use an equal weighting between the CTC and Language  Num speakers  Type  Train (minutes)  CER (%)  Na Na Chatino Japhug  1 1 1 1  Spontaneous narratives Elicited words & phrases Read speech Spontaneous narratives  273 188 81 170  14.5 4.7 23.5 12.8  Table 1: Information on the evaluation datasets used and the character error rate performance of the current recipe. attention objectives. For optimization we use a batch length of 30 and the Adadelta gradient de.scent algorithm (Zeiler, 2012). For more details, we include a link to the recipe.8 3.2 Elpis enhancements Beyond integration of ESPnet into Elpis, several other noteworthy enhancements have been made to Elpis. Detailed training feedback Prior to the work reported in this paper, the progress of training and transcribing stages was shown as a spinning icon with no other feedback. Due to the amount of time it takes to train even small speech recognition models, the lack of detailed feedback may cause a user to wonder what stage the training was at, or whether a fault had caused the system to fail. Dur.ing training and transcription, the backend pro.cessesí» logs are now output to the screen (see Fig.ure 1). Although the information in these logs may be more detailed than what the intended audience of the tool needs to understand, it does serve to give any user feedback on how training is going, and reassure them that it is still running (or notify them if a process has failed). The logs can also provide useful contextual information when de.bugging an experiment in collaborations between language workers and software engineers. CUDA-supported Docker image The type of Kaldi model which Elpis trains (using a Gaussian mixture model as the acoustic model) was origi.nally selected to be computationally ef.cient, and able to run on the type of computers commonly used by language researchers, which often doní»t have a GPU (graphics processing unit). With the addition of ESPnet, the bene.t of using a GPU will be felt through vastly reduced training times for the neural network. To this end, Elpis has been adapted to include Compute Uni.ed Device Ar.chitecture (CUDA) support, which is essential in order to leverage a GPU when training ESPnet on a machine that has one available. 4 Application to a new data set: Japhug The point of this work is to provide a tool that can be used by linguists in their limited-data scenar.ios. To this end we aim to experiment with diverse datasets that re.ect the breadth of language doc.umentation contexts. Going forward, this will be useful in getting a sense of what sort of model per.formance users can expect given the characteris.tics of dataset. In this section we report on further application of the model underpinning the Elpis. ESPnet integration to another data set. Japhug is a Sino-Tibetan language with a rich system of consonant clusters, as well as .amboy.ant morphology. In Japhug, syllables can have ini.tial clusters containing at most three consonants, and at most one coda (Jacques, 2019). Japhug does not have lexical tones. The languageí»s phonolog.ical pro.le is thus very different from Na (about which see Michaud, 2017) and Chatino (Cruz, 2011; Cruz and Woodbury, 2014; Cavar et al., 2016). The data set comprises a total of about 30 hours of transcribed recordings of narratives, time-aligned at the level of the sentence (Macaire, 2020), which is a huge amount in a language doc.umentation context. The recordings were made in the course of .eld trips from the .rst years of the century until now, in a quiet environment, and almost all of a single speaker. Our tests on vari.ous data sets so far suggest that these settings (one speaker . hence no speaker overlap . and clean au.dio) are those in which performance is most likely to be good when one happens to be training an acoustic model from scratch. The full data set is openly accessible online8https://github.com/ from the Pangloss Collection, under a Creative persephone-tools/espnet/commit/ 1c529eab738cc8e68617aebbae520f7c9c919081 Commons license, allowing visitors to browse the texts, and computer scientists to try their hand at 1 the data set.9 The data collectorí»s generous ap.proach to data sharing sets an impressive exam.0.8 ple, putting into practice some principles which Character Error Rate (%) gather increasing support, but which are not yet systematically translated into institutional and ed.itorial policies (Garellek et al., 2020). The dataset can be downloaded by sending a re.quest to the Cocoon data repository, which hosts 0.6 0.4 0.2 the Pangloss Collection. A script, retriever.py,10 retrieves resources with a certain language name. Data sets can then be created in various ways, such as sorting by speaker (tests suggest that single-speaker models are a good way to start) and by genre, e.g. excluding materials such as songs, which are a very different kettle of .sh from or.dinary speech and complicate model training. Figure 2 shows how the phoneme error rate de.creases as the amount of training data increases up to 170 minutes. Tests are currently being con.ducted to verify whether performance stagnates when the amount of data is increased beyond 170 minutes. As with the other experiments the recipe described in íý3.1 was used. For each amount of training data, the model was trained for 20 epochs for each of these training runs, with the smaller sets always as a subset of all larger sets. Figure 3 shows the training pro.le for a given training run using 170 minutes of data. 60 Character Error Rate (%) 0 Number of epochs Figure 3: Character error rate on the training set (blue) and validation set (orange) for Japhug as training pro.gresses (up to 20 epochs), using the ESPnet recipe in.cluded in Elpis. 5 Challenges concerning adoption of automatic speech recognition tools in language documentation Devoting a section to re.ections about adoption of automatic speech recognition tools in language documentation may seem super.uous here. The audience of a conference on the use of compu.tational methods in the study of endangered lan.guages is highly knowledgeable about the dif.cul.ties and the rewards of interdisciplinary projects, as a matter of course. But it seemed useful to in.clude a few general thoughts on this topic nonethe.less, for the attention of the broader readership 50 40 30 20 10 Training time (min) Figure 2: Character error rate for Japhug as a function which we hope will probe into the Proceedings of the ComputEL-4 conference: colleagues who may consider joining international efforts for wider adoption of natural language processing tools in language documentation work.ows. We brie.y address a few types of doubts and misgivings. 5.1 Is automatic speech recognition software too complex for language workers? A .rst concern is that automatic speech recogni.tion software is simply too complex for language workers. But it should be recalled that new tech.nologies that seem inaccessible to language work.ers can be game-changers in linguistics. For in-of the amount of training data, using the ESPnet recipe included in Elpis. 9Each text has a Digital Object Identi.er, allowing for one-click access. Readers are invited to take a look: https: //doi.org/10.24397/pangloss-0003360 10https://gitlab.com/lacito/ pangloss-elpis stance, the LATEX software is the typesetting back-end used by the journal Glossa (Rooryck, 2016) and by the publishing house Language Science Press (Nordhoff, 2018), which publish research in linguistics, offering high-quality open-access venues with no author fees or reader fees. Thus, LATEX, a piece of software which is notorious for its complexity, is used on a large scale in linguis.tics publishing: Glossa publishes more than 100 articles a year, and Language Science Press about 30 books a year. Key to this success is an or.ganizational setup whereby linguists receive not only a set of stylesheets and instructions, but also hands-on support from a LATEX expert all along the typesetting process. Undeniably complex soft.ware is only accessible to people with no prior knowledge of it if support is available. Automatic speech recognition software should be equally ac.cessible for language workers, given the right or.ganization and setup. Accordingly, special empha.sis is placed on user design in the Elpis project. This aspect of the work falls outside of the scope of the present paper, but we wanted to reassure potential users that it is clear to Elpis developers that the goal is to make the technology available to people who do not use the command line. If users can operate software such as ELAN then they will be more than equipped for the skills of uploading ELAN .les to Elpis and clicking the Train button. 5.2 Will the technology deliver on its promise? A second concern among language workers is whether the technology can deliver on its promise, or whether transcription acceleration projects are a case of í░digital innovation fetishismí▒ (Ampuja, 2020). Some language workers have reported a feeling that integration of automatic transcrip.tion into the language documentation work.ow (as described in Michaud et al., 2018) feels out of reach for them. There is no denying that nat.ural language processing tools such as ESPnet and Kaldi are very complex, and that currently, the help of specialists is still needed to make use of this technology in language documentation. How.ever, progress is clearly being made, and a moti.vated interdisciplinary community is growing at the intersection of language documentation and computer science, comprising linguists who are interested in investing time to learn about natu.ral language processing and computer scientists who want to achieve í░great things with small languagesí▒ (Thieberger and Nordlinger, 2006). It seems well worth investing in computational methods to assist in the urgent task of document.ing the worldí»s languages. 5.3 Keeping up with the state of the art vs. stabilizing the tool Finally, a concern among linguists is that the state of the art in computer science is evolving so rapidly that the tool cannot be stabilized, and hence cannot be proposed to language workers for enduring integration into the language docu.mentation work.ow. In cases where signi.cant, high-frequency updates are required to keep up with changes in speech recognition software, the investment could be too much for the relatively small communities of programmers involved in transcription acceleration projects. Our optimistic answer is that state-of-the-art code, or code close to the state of the art, need not be dif.cult to integrate, use or maintain. For example, the developers of Huggingfaceí»s Trans.formers 11 do an impressive job of wrapping the latest and greatest in natural language processing into an easy-to-use interface (Wolf et al., 2019). They have shown an ability to integrate new mod.els quickly after their initial publication. Usabil.ity and stability of the interface is dictated by the quality of the code that is written by the authors of the backend library. If this is done well then the state of the art can be integrated with minimal cod.ing effort by users of the library. For this reason, we are not so concerned about the shifting sands of the underlying building blocks, but the choice of quality backend library does count here. While it is true that there will have to be some modest effort to keep up to date with ESPnet (as would be the case using any other tool), in using ESPnet we are optimistic that the models supported by Elpis can remain up to date with the state of the art with.out too much hassle. 6 Further improvements The broader context to the work reported here is a rapidly evolving .eld in which various initia.tives aim to package natural language process.ing toolkits in intuitive interfaces so as to allow a wider audience to leverage the power of these toolkits. Directions for new developments in Elpis include (i) re.ning the ESPnet recipe, (ii) re.n.ing the user interface through user design pro.cesses, (iii) preparing pre-trained models that can be adapted to a small amount of data in a target 11https://github.com/huggingface/ transformers language, and (iv) providing Elpis as a web ser.vice. 6.1 Re.ning the ESPnet recipe Re.nement of the ESPnet recipe that is used in the Elpis pipeline, such that it works as well as possible given the type of data found in language documentation contexts, is a top priority. This work focuses on achieving lower error rates across data sets, starting with re.ning hyperparameters for model training and extends to other project objectives including providing pre-trained models (see íý6.3). This work is of a more experimental nature and can be done largely independently of the Elpis front-end. 6.2 Re.ning the interface In parallel with the technical integration of ESP-net with Elpis, a user-design process has been in.vestigating how users expect to use these new fea.tures. In a series of sessions, linguists and lan.guage workers discussed their diverse needs with a designer. The feedback from this process in.formed the building of a prototype interface based on the latest version of Elpis at the time. The test interface was then used in individual testing sessions to discover points of confusion and un.certainty in the interface. Results of the design process will guide an update to the interface and further work on writing supporting documentation and user guides. The details of this process are be.yond the scope of this paper and will be reported separately in future. 6.3 Pre-trained models and transfer learning Adapting a trained model to a new language has a long history in speech recognition, having been used both for Hidden Markov Model based sys.tems (Schultz and Waibel, 2001; Le and Besacier, 2005; Stolcke et al., 2006; Th et al., 2008; Plahl et al., 2011; Thomas et al., 2012; Imseng et al., 2014; Do et al., 2014; Heigold et al., 2013; Scharenborg et al., 2017) and end-to-end neural systems (Toshniwal et al., 2017; Chiu et al., 2018; Mler et al., 2017; Dalmia et al., 2018; Watan.abe et al., 2017a; Inaguma et al., 2018; Yi et al., 2018; Adams et al., 2019). In scenarios where data in the target domain or language is limited, leveraging models trained on a number of speak.ers in different languages often can result in a bet.ter performance. The model can learn to cope with acoustic and phonetic characteristics that are com.mon between languages, such as building robust.ness to channel variability due to different record.ing conditions, as well as learning common fea.tures of phones and sequences of phones between languages. In recent years pre-training of models on large amounts of unannotated data has led to break.through results in text-based natural language processing, initially gaining widespread popular.ity with the context-independent embeddings of word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013) and GloVe (Pen.nington et al., 2014), before the recent contextual word embedding revolution (Peters et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2020) that has harnessed the transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017). It is now the case that the best ap.proaches in natural language processing are typ.ically characterized by pre-training of a model on a large amount of unannotated data using the cloze task (a.k.a masked language model train.ing) before .ne-tuning to a target task. Models pre-trained in this way best make use of avail.able data since the amount of unannotated data far outweighs annotated data and such pre-training is advantageous to downstream learning, whether a small or large amount of data is available in the tar.get task (Gururangan et al., 2020). Despite the es.tablished nature of pre-training in natural language processing, it is less well established in speech recognition, though there has been recent work (Rivi¿¿re et al., 2020; Baevski et al., 2020). The language documentation scenario, where annotated data is very limited is a scenario that we argue stands most to gain from such pre.training (both supervised and self-supervised out-of-domain); followed by model adaptation to lim.ited target language data. One of the features Elpis could provide is to include pre-trained models in its distribution or via an online service. Such mod.els may be pre-trained in a self-supervised manner on lots of untranscribed speech, trained in a super.vised manner on transcribed speech in other lan.guages, or use a combination of both pre-training tasks. In cases where the pre-trained model was trained in a supervised manner, there is scope to deploy techniques to reconcile the differences in acoustic realization between phonemes of differ.ent languages via methods such as that of Al.losaurus (Li et al., 2020) which uses a joint model of language-independent phones and language.dependent phonemes. Providing a variety of pre.trained models would be valuable, since the best seed model for adaptation may vary on the basis of the data in the target language (Adams et al., 2019). A recognized problem in language documenta.tion is that, owing to the transcription bottleneck, a large amount of unannotated and untranscribed data ends up in data graveyards (Himmelmann, 2006): archived recordings that go unused in lin.guistic research. It is frequently the case that the vast majority of speech collected by .eld linguists is untranscribed. Here too, self-supervised pre.training in the target language is likely a promis.ing avenue to pursue, perhaps in tandem with su.pervised pre-training regiments. For this reason, we are optimistic that automatic transcription will have a role to play in almost all data scenarios found in the language documentation context . even when training data is extremely limited . and is not just reserved for certain single-speaker cor.pora with consistently high quality audio and clean alignments with text. In the past one could plau.sibly argue that the limited amount of transcribed speech as training data is an insurmountable hur.dle in a language documentation context, but that will likely not remain the case. One of the next steps planned for Elpis is to al.low for acoustic models to be exported and loaded. Beyond the immediate bene.t of saving the trou.ble of training models anew each time, having a library of acoustic models available in an on-line repository would facilitate further research on adaptation of acoustic models to (i) more speak.ers, and (ii) more language varieties. Building universal phone recognition systems is an active area of research (Li et al., 2020); these develop.ments could bene.t from the availability of acous.tic models on a range of languages. Hosting acoustic models in an online repository, and us.ing them for transfer learning, appear as promising perspectives. 6.4 Providing Elpis as a web service Training models requires a lot of computing power. Elpis now supports high-speed parallel processing in situations where the userí»s operat.ing system has compatible GPUs (see Section 3.2). However, many users doní»t have this technology in the computers they have ready access to, so we also plan to investigate possibilities for host.ing Elpis on a high-capacity server for end-user access. Providing language technologies via web services appears to be a successful method of mak.ing tools widely available, with examples includ.ing the WebMAUS forced-alignment tool.12 The suite of tools provided by the Bavarian Speech Archive (Kisler et al., 2017) have successfully pro.cessed more than ten million media .les since their introduction in 2012. For users who want to avoid sending data to a server, there are other pos.sibilities: Kaldi can be compiled to Web Assem.bly so it can do decoding in a browser (Hu et al., 2020). But for the type of user scenarios consid.ered here, hosting on a server would have major advantages, and transfer over secure connection is a strong protection against data theft (for those data sets that must not be made public, to follow the consultantsí» wishes or protect the data collec.torsí» exclusive access rights to the data so that they will not be scooped in research and placed at a dis.advantage in job applications). This context suggests that it would be highly de.sirable to design web hosting for Elpis. It would facilitate conducting broad sets of tests training acoustic models, and would also facilitate the tran.scription of untranscribed recordings. 7 Conclusion In this paper we have reported on integrating ES-Pnet, an end-to-end neural network speech recog.nition system, into Elpis, the user-friendly speech recognition interface. We described changes that have been made to the front-end, the addition of a CUDA supported Elpis Docker.le, and the cre.ation of an ESPnet recipe for Elpis. We reported preliminary results on several languages and artic.ulated plans going forward. Acknowledgments Many thanks to the three reviewers for comments and suggestions. We are grateful for .nancial support to the Elpis project from the Australian Research Coun.cil Centre of Excellence for the Dynamics of Lan.guage, the University of Queensland, the Insti.tut des langues rares (ILARA) at .cole Pratique des Hautes .tudes, the European Research Coun.cil (as part of the project í░Beyond boundaries: 12https://clarin.phonetik.uni-muenchen. de/BASWebServices/interface Religion, region, language and the stateí▒ [ERC.609823]) and Agence Nationale de la Recherche (as part of two projects, í░Computational Language Documentation by 2025í▒ [ANR-19-CE38-0015.04] and í░Empirical Foundations of Linguisticsí▒ [ANR-10-LABX-0083]). Linguistic resources used in the present study were collected as part of projects funded by the European Research Council (í░Discourse report.ing in African storytellingí▒ [ERC-758232]) and by Agence Nationale de la Recherche (í░Parallel cor.pora in languages of the Greater Himalayan areaí▒ [ANR-12-CORP-0006]). References Oliver Adams, Trevor Cohn, Graham Neubig, Hilaria Cruz, Steven Bird, and Alexis Michaud. 2018. Eval.uating phonemic transcription of low-resource tonal languages for language documentation. In Proceed.ings of LREC 2018 (Language Resources and Eval.uation Conference), pages 3356.3365, Miyazaki. https://halshs.archives-ouvertes. fr/halshs-01709648. Oliver Adams, Matthew Wiesner, Shinji Watanabe, and David Yarowsky. 2019. Massively multilin.gual adversarial speech recognition. In Proceed.ings of the 2019 Conference of the North Ameri.can Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Vol.ume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 96.108, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for Compu.tational Linguistics. https://www.aclweb. org/anthology/N19-1009. Marko Ampuja. 2020. The blind spots of digital in.novation fetishism. In Matteo Stocchetti, editor, The digital age and its discontents: Critical re.ec.tions in education, pages 31.54. Helsinki Univer.sity Press, Helsinki. https://doi.org/10. 33134/HUP-4-2. Alexei Baevski, Henry Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. 2020. wav2vec 2.0: A framework for self-supervised learning of speech representa.tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11477. https: //arxiv.org/abs/2006.11477. Laurent Besacier, Etienne Barnard, Alexey Karpov, and Tanja Schultz. 2014. Automatic speech recog.nition for under-resourced languages: A survey. Speech Communication, 56:85.100. Rogier Blokland, Marina Fedina, Ciprian Gersten.berger, Niko Partanen, Michael Rie.ler, and Joshua Wilbur. 2015. Language documen.tation meets language technology. In Pro.ceedings of the First International Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Uralic Lan.guages -Septentrio Conference Series, pages 8. 18. http://septentrio.uit.no/index. php/SCS/article/view/3457/3386. Ma.gorzata Cavar, Damir Cavar, and Hilaria Cruz. 2016. Endangered language documentation: boot.strapping a Chatino speech corpus, forced aligner, ASR. In Proceedings of LREC 2016, Tenth Interna.tional Conference on Language Resources and Eval.uation, pages 4004.4011, Portoro., Slovenia. Chung-Cheng Chiu, Tara N Sainath, Yonghui Wu, Ro.hit Prabhavalkar, Patrick Nguyen, Zhifeng Chen, Anjuli Kannan, Ron J Weiss, Kanishka Rao, Katya Gonina, et al. 2018. State-of-the-art speech recogni.tion with sequence-to-sequence models. In ICASSP, pages 4774.4778. https://arxiv.org/abs/ 1712.01769. Christopher Cox. 2019. Persephone-ELAN (software). https://github.com/coxchristopher/persephone-elan. https://github.com/coxchristopher/ persephone-elan. Emiliana Cruz. 2011. Phonology, tone and the functions of tone in San Juan Quiahije Chatino. Ph.D., University of Texas at Austin, Austin. http://hdl.handle.net/2152/ ETD-UT-2011-08-4280. Emiliana Cruz and Tony Woodbury. 2014. Finding a way into a family of tone languages: The story and methods of the Chatino Language Documentation Project. Language Documentation and Conserva.tion, 8:490.524. http://hdl.handle.net/ 10125/24615. Siddharth Dalmia, Ramon Sanabria, Florian Metze, and Alan W Black. 2018. Sequence-based multi.lingual low resource speech recognition. In ICASSP. https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.07420. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language under.standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 4171.4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Asso.ciation for Computational Linguistics. https:// www.aclweb.org/anthology/N19-1423. Van Hai Do, Xiong Xiao, Eng Siong Chng, and Haizhou Li. 2014. Cross-lingual phone mapping for large vocabulary speech recognition of under-resourced languages. IEICE Transactions on Infor.mation and Systems, E97-D(2):285.295. Daan van Esch, Ben Foley, and Nay San. 2019. Future directions in technological support for language documentation. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Methods for Endan.gered Languages, volume 1, Honolulu, Hawaií«i. https://computel-workshop.org/ wp-content/uploads/2019/02/CEL3_ book_papers_draft.pdf#page=26. Ben Foley, Josh Arnold, Rolando Coto-Solano, Gau.tier Durantin, and T. Mark Ellison. 2018. Building speech recognition systems for language documen.tation: the CoEDL Endangered Language Pipeline and Inference System (ELPIS). In Proceedings of the 6th Intl. Workshop on Spoken Language Tech.nologies for Under-Resourced Languages (SLTU), 29-31 August 2018, pages 200.204, Gurugram, India. ISCA. https://www.isca-speech. org/archive/SLTU_2018/pdfs/Ben.pdf. Ben Foley, Alina Rakhi, Nicholas Lambourne, Nicholas Buckeridge, and Janet Wiles. 2019. Elpis, an accessible speech-to-text tool. In Proceedings of Interspeech 2019, pages 306.310, Graz. https: //www.isca-speech.org/archive/ Interspeech_2019/pdfs/8006.pdf. Marc Garellek, Matthew Gordon, James Kirby, Wai-Sum Lee, Alexis Michaud, Christine Moosham.mer, Oliver Niebuhr, Daniel Recasens, Timo Roettger, Adrian Simpson, and Kristine M. Yu. 2020. Toward open data policies in pho.netics: What we can gain and how we can avoid pitfalls. Journal of Speech Science, 9(1). https://halshs.archives-ouvertes. fr/halshs-02894375. Alex Graves, Santiago Fernandez, Faustino Gomez, and Jurgen Schmidhuber. 2006. Connection.ist Temporal Classi.cation : Labelling Unseg.mented Sequence Data with Recurrent Neural Networks. Proceedings of the 23rd interna.tional conference on Machine Learning, pages 369.376. http://www.cs.utoronto.ca/ ~graves/icml_2006.pdf. Suchin Gururangan, Ana Marasovic,. Swabha Swayamdipta, Kyle Lo, Iz Beltagy, Doug Downey, and Noah A. Smith. 2020. Doní»t stop pretraining: Adapt language models to domains and tasks. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Asso.ciation for Computational Linguistics, pages 8342. 8360. Association for Computational Linguistics. https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.10964. Hossein Hadian, Hossein Sameti, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2018. End-to-end speech recognition using lattice-free MMI. In Interspeech, pages 12.16. https://danielpovey.com/ files/2018_interspeech_end2end.pdf. Awni Hannun, Carl Case, Jared Casper, Bryan Catanzaro, Greg Diamos, Erich Elsen, Ryan Prenger, Sanjeev Satheesh, Shubho Sengupta, Adam Coates, et al. 2014. Deep speech: Scaling up end-to-end speech recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.5567. https://arxiv.org/abs/ 1412.5567. Georg Heigold, Vincent Vanhoucke, Alan Senior, Patrick Nguyen, Marcí»Aurelio Ranzato, Matthieu Devin, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013. Multilingual acous.tic models using distributed deep neural networks. In Proceedings of ICASSP, pages 8619.8623. Nikolaus Himmelmann. 2006. Language documenta.tion: what is it and what is it good for? In Josh Gip.pert, Nikolaus Himmelmann, and Ulrike Mosel, ed.itors, Essentials of language documentation, pages 1.30. De Gruyter, Berlin/New York. Geoffrey Hinton, Li Deng, Dong Yu, George E Dahl, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, Navdeep Jaitly, Andrew Senior, Vincent Vanhoucke, Patrick Nguyen, Tara N Sainath, and Others. 2012. Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in speech recognition: The shared views of four research groups. Signal Processing Magazine, IEEE, 29(6):82.97. Nils Hjortnaes, Niko Partanen, Michael Rie.ler, and Francis M. Tyers. 2020. Towards a speech recognizer for Komi, an endangered and low-resource Uralic language. In Proceed.ings of the Sixth International Workshop on Computational Linguistics of Uralic Languages, pages 31.37, Wien. Association for Computa.tional Linguistics. https://www.aclweb. org/anthology/2020.iwclul-1.5/. Mathieu Hu, Laurent Pierron, Emmanuel Vincent, and Denis Jouvet. 2020. Kaldi-web: An installation-free, on-device speech recognition system. In Pro.ceedings of Interspeech 2020 Show & Tell, Shang.hai. https://hal.archives-ouvertes. fr/hal-02910876. David Imseng, Petr Motlicek, Herv¿ª Bourlard, and Philip N Garner. 2014. Using out-of-language data to improve an under-resourced speech recognizer. Speech Communication, 56:142.151. Hirofumi Inaguma, Jaejin Cho, Murali Karthick Baskar, Tatsuya Kawahara, and Shinji Watan.abe. 2018. Transfer learning of language-independent end-to-end ASR with language model fusion. arXiv:1811.02134. https://arxiv. org/abs/1811.02134. Guillaume Jacques. 2019. Japhug. Journal of the In.ternational Phonetic Association, 49(3):427.450. Thomas Kisler, Uwe Reichel, and Florian Schiel. 2017. Multilingual processing of speech via web services. Computer Speech & Language, 45:326.347. ISBN: 0885-2308 Publisher: Elsevier. Viet Bac Le and Laurent Besacier. 2005. First steps in fast acoustic modeling for a new target language: application to Vietnamese. In ICASSP. Xinjian Li, Siddharth Dalmia, Juncheng Li, Matthew Lee, Patrick Littell, Jiali Yao, Antonios Anas.tasopoulos, David R. Mortensen, Graham Neu.big, and Alan W. Black. 2020. Universal phone recognition with a multilingual allophone system. In ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Confer.ence on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 8249.8253. IEEE. https:// arxiv.org/abs/2002.11800. Qi Liu, Matt J Kusner, and Phil Blunsom. 2020. A survey on contextual embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.07278. https://arxiv. org/abs/2003.07278. C¿ªcile Macaire. 2020. Alignement temporel entre tran.scriptions et audio de donn¿ªes de langue japhug. In Actes des Journ¿ªes scienti.ques du Groupement de Recherche "Linguistique informatique, formelle et de terrain" (LIFT), Paris. https://hal. archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-03047146. Boyd Michailovsky, Martine Mazaudon, Alexis Michaud, S¿ªverine Guillaume, Alexandre Fran.ois, and Evangelia Adamou. 2014. Doc.umenting and researching endangered lan.guages: the Pangloss Collection. Language Documentation and Conservation, 8:119.135. https://halshs.archives-ouvertes. fr/halshs-01003734. Alexis Michaud. 2017. Tone in Yongning Na: lex.ical tones and morphotonology. Number 13 in Studies in Diversity Linguistics. Language Science Press, Berlin. http://langsci-press.org/ catalog/book/109. Alexis Michaud, Oliver Adams, Trevor Cohn, Graham Neubig, and S¿ªverine Guillaume. 2018. Integrat.ing automatic transcription into the language docu.mentation work.ow: experiments with Na data and the Persephone toolkit. Language Documentation and Conservation, 12:393.429. http://hdl. handle.net/10125/24793. Tom¿ó. Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Cor.rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa.tions of words and phrases and their compositional.ity. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 3111.3119. Markus Mler, Sebastian Ster, and Alex Waibel. 2017. Phonemic and graphemic multilingual CTC based speech recognition. arXiv:1711.04564. https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.04564. Sebastian Nordhoff. 2018. Language Science Press business model: Evaluated version of the 2015 model. Language Science Press, Berlin. https: //doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1286972. Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, and Luca Antiga. 2019. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in neural information processing systems. Proceedings of the 33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), pages 8026.8037, Vancouver, Canada. https://papers.nips.cc/paper/ Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. 2014. Glove: global vectors for word rep.resentation. Proceedings of the Empiricial Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2014), 12:1532.1543. Matthew E Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized word rep.resentations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05365. https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.05365. Christian Plahl, Ralf Schler, and Hermann Ney. 2011. Cross-lingual portability of Chinese and En.glish neural network features for French and Ger.man LVCSR. In IEEE Workshop on Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding (ASRU), pages 371.376. Daniel Povey, Arnab Ghoshal, Gilles Boulianne, Lukas Burget, Ondrej Glembek, Nagendra Goel, Mirko Hannemann, Petr Motlicek, Yanmin Qian, Petr Schwarz, Jan Silovsky, Georg Stemmer, and Karel Vesely. 2011. The Kaldi speech recognition toolkit. In IEEE 2011 Workshop on Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding. IEEE Signal Processing Society. https://infoscience. epfl.ch/record/192584/files/Povey_ ASRU2011_2011.pdf. Mirco Ravanelli, Titouan Parcollet, and Yoshua Ben.gio. 2019. The pytorch-kaldi speech recogni.tion toolkit. In ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE Interna.tional Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Sig.nal Processing (ICASSP), pages 6465.6469. IEEE. https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.07453. Morgane Rivi¿¿re, Armand Joulin, Pierre-Emmanuel Mazar¿ª, and Emmanuel Dupoux. 2020. Unsuper.vised pretraining transfers well across languages. In ICASSP 2020 -2020 IEEE International Confer.ence on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 7414.7418. https://arxiv. org/abs/2002.02848. Johan Rooryck. 2016. Introducing Glossa. Glossa, 1(1):1.3. http://doi.org/10.5334/ gjgl.91. Odette Scharenborg, Francesco Ciannella, Shruti Palaskar, Alan Black, Florian Metze, Lucas Ondel, and Mark Hasegawa-Johnson. 2017. Building an ASR system for a low-research language through the adaptation of a high-resource language ASR system: preliminary results. In International Conference on Natural Language, Signal and Speech Processing (ICNLSSP). Tanja Schultz and Alex Waibel. 2001. Experi.ments on cross-language acoustic modeling. EU.ROSPEECHí»01, pages 2721.2724. 9015-pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.Andreas Stolcke, Frantisek Grezl, Mei-Yuh Hwang, pdf. Xin Lei, Nelson Morgan, and Dimitra Vergyri. 2006. Cross-domain and cross-language portabil.ity of acoustic features estimated by multilayer per.ceptrons. In ICASSP. http://ieeexplore. ieee.org/document/1660022/. Nick Thieberger and Rachel Nordlinger. 2006. Doing great things with small languages (Aus.tralian Research Council grant DP0984419). https://arts.unimelb.edu.au/ school-of-languages-and-linguistics/ our-research/ past-research-projects/ great-things-small-languages. Samuel Thomas, Sriram Ganapathy, Hynek Herman-sky, and Speech Processing. 2012. Multilingual MLP features for low-resource LVCSR systems. In ICASSP, pages 4269.4272. Shubham Toshniwal, Tara N. Sainath, Ron J. Weiss, Bo Li, Pedro Moreno, Eugene Weinstein, and Kan.ishka Rao. 2017. Multilingual speech recognition with a single end-to-end model. In ICASSP. http: //arxiv.org/abs/1711.01694. L¿ószlTh, Joe Frankel, G¿óbor Gosztolya, and Simon King. 2008. Cross-lingual portability of MLP-based tandem features -a case study for English and Hun.garian. INTERSPEECH. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, .ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information pro.cessing systems, pages 5998.6008. Shinji Watanabe, Takaaki Hori, and John R. Her.shey. 2017a. Language independent end-to-end architecture for joint language identi.cation and speech recognition. In IEEE Workshop on Automatic Speech Recognition and Under.standing Workshop (ASRU), pages 265.271. https://www.merl.com/publications/ docs/TR2017-182.pdf. Shinji Watanabe, Takaaki Hori, Shigeki Karita, Tomoki Hayashi, Jiro Nishitoba, Yuya Unno, Nelson Enrique Yalta Soplin, Jahn Heymann, Matthew Wiesner, and Nanxin Chen. 2018. ESPnet: End-to-end speech processing toolkit. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.00015. https://arxiv. org/abs/1804.00015. Shinji Watanabe, Takaaki Hori, Suyoun Kim, John R Hershey, and Tomoki Hayashi. 2017b. Hy.brid CTC/attention architecture for end-to-end speech recognition. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, 11(8):1240.1253. https://www.merl.com/publications/ docs/TR2017-190.pdf. Guillaume Wisniewski, S¿ªverine Guillaume, and Alexis Michaud. 2020. Phonemic transcription of low-resource languages: To what extent can preprocessing be automated? In Proceedings of the 1st Joint SLTU (Spoken Language Tech.nologies for Under-resourced languages) and CCURL (Collaboration and Computing for Under-Resourced Languages) Workshop, pages 306.315, Marseille, France. European Language Resources Association (ELRA). https://halshs. archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02513914. Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pier.ric Cistac, Tim Rault, R¿ªmi Louf, Morgan Funtow.icz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. 2019. Huggingfaceí»s transformers: State-of-the-art natu.ral language processing. ArXiv, abs/1910.03771. https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.03771. Jiangyan Yi, Jianhua Tao, Zhengqi Wen, and Ye Bai. 2018. Adversarial multilingual training for low-resource speech recognition. ICASSP, pages 4899. 4903. Matthew D. Zeiler. 2012. Adadelta: an adaptive learn.ing rate method. arXiv preprint arXiv:1212.5701. https://arxiv.org/abs/1212.5701. Albert Zeyer, Kazuki Irie, Ralf Schler, and Hermann Ney. 2018. Improved training of end-to-end at.tention models for speech recognition. https: //arxiv.org/abs/1805.03294. Wei Zhou, Wilfried Michel, Kazuki Irie, Markus Kitza, Ralf Schler, and Hermann Ney. 2020. The RWTH ASR system for TED-LIUM Release 2: Improv.ing Hybrid HMM with SpecAugment. https: //arxiv.org/abs/2004.00960. 