Future Directions in Technological Support for Language Documentation Anonymous ComputEL-3 submission Abstract To reduce the annotation burden placed on lin.guistic .eldworkers, freeing up time for deeper linguistic analysis and descriptive work, the language documentation community has been working with machine learning researchers to investigate what role technology can play, with promising early results. This paper de.scribes a number of potential follow-up tech.nical projects that we believe would be worth.while and straightforward to do. We pro.vide examples of the annotation tasks for com.puter scientists; descriptions of the technologi.cal challenges involved and the estimated level of complexity; and pointers to relevant litera.ture. We hope providing a clear overview of what the needs are and what annotation chal.lenges exist will help facilitate the dialogue and collaboration between computer scientists and .eldwork linguists. 1 The Transcription and Annotation Challenge Language documentation projects typically yield more data than can be reasonably annotated and analyzed by the linguistic .eldworkers that collect the data. For example, transcribing one hour of audio recordings can take 40 hours or more (Du.rantin et al., 2017), and potentially even longer where the language is severely under-studied or under-described. To reduce the annotation burden placed on linguistic .eldworkers, freeing up time for deeper linguistic analysis and descriptive work, the language documentation community has been working with machine learning (ML) researchers to investigate what role technology can play. As a result, today enterprising .eldwork linguists can use a number of toolkits, including CoEDL Elpis (Foley et al., 2018), Persephone (Adams et al., 2018; Michaud et al., 2018), and SPPAS (Bigi, 2015). 2 A Technological Development Roadmap These toolkits are already showing promising re.sults across a number of languages. Arguably, however, their current incarnation only scratches the surface of what is technically possible today. In this paper, we aim to describe a number of po.tential extensions to these systems, which we be.lieve would be reasonably straightforward to im.plement, yet which should signi.cantly improve the quality and usefulness of the output. Specif.ically, we look at the annotation steps in the lan.guage documentation process beyond just phone.mic or orthographic transcription, and describe what role technology can play for many other steps in the language documentation process, such as automatically proposing glossing and translation candidates. To be clear, this paper does not actually describe complete systems that have been implemented. Rather, our goal is to describe technical projects that we believe would be worthwhile and straight.forward to do. We provide examples of the anno.tation tasks for computer scientists; descriptions of the technological challenges involved and the estimated level of complexity; and pointers to rel.evant literature on both the computational and the linguistic side. Our hope is that providing a clear overview of what the needs are and what anno.tation challenges exist will help facilitate the dia.logue and collaboration between computer scien.tists and .eldwork linguists. Our higher-level vision is for a toolkit that lets .eldwork linguists process data at scale, with lim.ited technical knowledge needed on the side of the user. This toolkit should make it as easy as possible to apply the most relevant well-known techniques in natural language processing and ma.chine learning to any language. This will likely involve providing a simple, pre-con.gured graph.ical user interface; for the purposes of this paper, however, we focus on the underlying technology. For our purposes, we assume there is an au.dio corpus where orthographic transcriptions are available for at least some subset of the recordings. If no orthographic transcriptions exist at all, then there are a number of techniques around audio-only corpus analysis that can be applied, such as those explored in the Zero-Resource Speech Chal.lenges (Dunbar et al., 2017), but those approaches are outside of the scope of this paper. We also assume that the corpus at hand was created in a relatively ubiquitous tool for lan.guage documentation, like ELAN (Max Planck In.stitute for Psycholinguistics; Brugman and Rus.sel, 2004), Praat (Boersma and Weenink, 2001) or Transcriber (DGA, 2014) which allows the data to be exported easily into a common format that can be understood by our toolkit. Finally, we as.sume that the linguist has access to a tool to create keyboards for use on a desktop/laptop system (e.g. (SIL)), so an appropriate orthography can be used, and that the linguist has easy access to an IPA en.try input method. Broadly, we see two areas where automation toolkits for language documentation can make sig.ni.cant headway still: automatic analysis of ex.isting data in the corpus, and automatic process.ing of unannotated data. To facilitate the discus.sion below, table 1 brie.y walks through a reason.ably comprehensive set of annotations for an au.dio recording. Speci.cally, for each word in our (made-up) example utterance, table 1 includes: . a speaker label to indicate which of the speak.ers in the recording spoke this word . a language tag in ISO 639 notation . the orthographic form, or simply spelling, of this word . an interlinear gloss, which we will describe in further detail below for readers who are unfa.miliar with this practice . a part-of-speech tag, e.g. using the conven.tions from (Petrov et al., 2012) . a phonemic transcription in the International Phonetic Alphabet In addition, our example annotation shows a translation of the entire utterance into a single lan.1guage. 3 Analysis of Existing Data 3.1 Text Analytics In terms of automatic analysis of existing data, there appears to be a signi.cant amount of low-hanging fruit around text-based analytics. Once a language worker has put the effort into preparing a corpus for use in a toolkit, by normalizing and consolidating .les, the data becomes suitable for automatic analysis to obtain corpus-wide metrics. For example, a toolkit could easily emit the fol.lowing metrics on the orthographic transcriptions in the corpus: . the total number of words observed2 . the number of unique words observed . a frequency-ranked wordlist, with word counts . the average number of words in each utter.ance, and a histogram of words per utterance These metrics can also be broken down by speaker, if multiple speakers are present in the cor.pus and speaker annotations are available in the metadata. In that case, a toolkit could also auto.matically compute statistics such as pointwise mu.tual information score for the usage of each word by each speaker, or by speaker group, for exam.ple if multiple varieties are represented in the cor.pus. This may point to interesting inter-speaker or inter-variety lexical frequency differences that merit further investigation. For a comprehensive literature review of automatic analysis options in this space, see (Wieling and Nerbonne, 2015). Frequency-ranked wordlists in particular can also be helpful for quality assurance purposes: words at the bottom of the list may occur only as one-off hapax legomena, but they may also be 1Fieldwork linguists can, naturally, choose to create this translation in any language. In our example, for expository purposes, we used English. 2We use ˇ±wordsˇ± here to mean speci.cally orthographic units separated by whitespace in the target-language orthog.raphy; if such separation is not part of the orthography, then more complex approaches are needed, as is the case when users wish to run these analyses based on lexical roots (after morphological analysis). (Audio)  Speaker  Language  Spelling  Gloss  Part-of-Speech  Phonemes  this  SP1  ENG  this  DEM  DET  .s  is  SP1  ENG  is  be-PRS-3SG  VERB  .z  uno  SP2  ESP  uno  DET-INDF  DET  uno  libro  SP2  ESP  libro  book  NOUN  libo  Table 1: Annotations for an example recording. Here, the English translation would be ˇ±This is a book.ˇ± misspelled versions of more frequent words. Re.viewing a frequency-ranked list may help .nd or.thographic inconsistencies in the data set. In fact, an automatic toolkit could also emit additional in.formation around annotation quality, such as: . a frequency-ranked character list, with point.ers to utterances that contain rarely used char.acters (on the assumption that they may be data entry mistakes) . words that seem to be misspellings of another word, based on edit distance and/or context For datasets with comprehensive, clean wordlists, a transcription tool with built-in spell-checking or word-completion features would bene.t users. If no clean wordlist exists yet, a frequency-based wordlist is a good start and can be human-curated. Going beyond just orthographic words, .nite-state technologies may also be needed, especially for morphologically complex languages where stems may have more variations than could ever be covered by a simple wordlist, as is frequently described in the litera.ture; two relevant recent surveys are (Mager et al., 2018; Littell et al., 2018). If interlinear glosses are available in the corpus, the toolkit could also easily emit a list of all words and their glosses, highlighting words with multi.ple glosses, as these may (but do not necessarily) represent data entry inconsistencies; the same is true for part-of-speech tags. Where phoneme annotations are present, a forced-alignment with the orthographic transcrip.tion may be carried out to surface any outliers, as these may represent either orthographic or phonemic transcription errors (Jansche, 2014). Of course, a phoneme frequency analysis could also be produced and may yield interesting insights. It should also be straightforward, though the linguistic value of this would remain to be deter.mined, to apply an unsupervised automatic mor.phemic analyzer like Morfessor (Virpioja et al., 2013). 3.2 Visualization Language documentation toolkits will bene.t from integration with information visualization tools. Visual data analysis can give a linguist a general overview of the nature of a corpus, and narrow in on data to support new, detailed insights. For example, a broad view of a language collec.tion can be given by visualizing metadata from the corpus, representing the activity of the docu.mentation process as a heatmap of the recording dates/times/participants. Date and time visualiza.tions could show patterns within recording loca.tions and events, indicating how long it took to create the corpus, and how old the data is. Visualizations showing which time spans within a corpus have been annotated on particular tiers would allow a linguist to quickly obtain a sense of the state of transcription. A representation of transcription state showing what has been tran.scribed, the types of existing transcriptions, with summaries of metadata, will assist the language worker to understand the shape of their parallel layered data, and develop well-constructed cor.pora. This information could help prevent un.expected data loss when moving from complex multi-tier transcription to other modes of represen.tation (Thieberger, 2016). Detailed visualizations can represent linguis.tic features of the data, giving the linguist on-demand access to explore a variety of phenomena (for example, using ANNIS (Krause and Zeldes, 2016)), such as compositional structure of lin.guistic units (hierarchical data), associations be.tween words (relational data) and alternative word choices (Culy and Lyding, 2010). Finally, a toolkit could output a high-level overview of statistics and visualizations for a given corpus as a ˇ±corpus landing pageˇ±: a de.scription of the collection for online publishing, or to facilitate discovery of the data within an archive (Thieberger, 2016). 4 Extending Automatic Processing of Unannotated Data 4.1 Audio Analysis Generally, part of the data set at hand will be miss.ing at least some of the annotation layers in our example above. At the most basic level, it may not be known what parts of an audio collection contain human speech, what parts contain other types of sound (e.g. only nature or car noise), or even just quiet. A speech vs. non-speech classi.er, known as a ˇ±voice activity detectorˇ± or VAD (Ramirez et al., 2007), should be built into the toolkit. One open-source VAD is the WebRTC Voice Activity Detector, with an easy-to-use Python wrapper in (Wiseman, 2016). Beyond voice activity detec.tion, speaker identi.cation or diarization may also be necessary. In this regard, the work recently done as part of the First DIHARD Speech Diariza.tion Challenge (Church et al., 2018) is particularly relevant for .eldwork recordings, which are chal.lenging corpora for these technologies. Practically, entirely unannotated data sets are rare: usually at least the language of the data set is known. Where it isnˇŻt, or where multiple lan.guages exist within a given recording, it will also be helpful to be able to identify the language spo.ken in each part of the audio, based on the record.ing alone, though this is a hard technical chal.lenge (Gonzalez-Dominguez et al., 2014). As a .rst step, multiple existing recognizers could be executed, and their output could be analyzed to de.termine which one produces the most likely tran.script, using an approach like (Demˇ¦sar, 2006). 4.2 Automatic Phonemic and Orthographic Transcription Once the location(s) and the language(s) of speech within the target audio recordings are known, the relevant audio fragments can be processed by speech recognition systems such as those de.scribed in (Foley et al., 2018) or (Adams et al., 2018) in order to produce automatic machine hy.potheses for phonemic and orthographic transcrip.tions. TodayˇŻs Elpis and Persephone pipelines are maturing, and are relatively complete packages, but they could be made easier to use for people without backgrounds in speech science. 4.2.1 Pronunciations For example, Elpis currently requires the lin.guist to provide a machine-readable grapheme-to-phoneme mapping. However, these may al.ready be available from current libraries (Deri and Knight, 2016), derivable from existing databases like Ausphon-Lexicon (Round, 2017), or present in regional language collections such as the Aus.tralian Pronunciation Lexicon (Estival et al., 2014) and Sydney Speaks (of Excellence for the Dynam.ics of Language, 2018). These resources could be integrated directly into the toolkit. Elpis currently also offers no support for handling not-a-word to.kens like numbers (van Esch and Sproat, 2017), but this could be supported using a relatively ac.cessible grammar framework where the number grammar can be induced using a small number of examples (Gorman and Sproat, 2016). 4.2.2 Text Corpora Toolkits should also facilitate easy ingestion of ad.ditional text corpora, which is particularly useful for training large-vocabulary speech recognition systems. For some endangered languages, text corpora such as Bible translations or Wikipedia datasets may be available to augment limited data sets coming in from language documenta.tion work. Of course, the content of these sources may not be idael for use in training conversational systems, but when faced with low-data situations, even out-of-domain data tends to help. As more text data becomes available, it would also be good to sweep ASR language model parameters (such as the n-gram order) automatically to achieve the best possible result. 4.2.3 Audio Quality Enhancement In terms of audio quality, itˇŻs worth pointing out that audio recorded during .eld work is often made in noisy conditions, with intrusive animal and bird noises, environmental sounds, or air-conditioners whirring. Noisy corpora may be.come easier to process if automatic denoising and speech enhancement techniques are integrated into the pipeline. Loizou (2013) provides a recent overview of this particular area. 4.2.4 Multilingual Models To further improve the quality of ASR within toolkits like Elpis and Persephone, multilingual acoustic models can be trained on data sets from multiple languages (Besacier et al., 2014; Tosh.niwal et al., 2018). This could allow so-called ˇ±zero-shotˇ± model usage, meaning the application of these acoustic models to new languages, with.out any training data at all in the target language. Of course, the accuracy of such an approach would depend on how similar the target language is to the languages that were included in the training data for the multilingual model. Another approach is simply to reuse a monolingual acoustic model from a similar language. Either way, these mod.els can be adapted towards the target language as training data becomes available through annota.tion. 4.2.5 Automatic Creation of Interlinear Glosses Beyond automatically generating hypotheses for phonemic and orthographic transcriptions, it would technically also be relatively straightfor.ward to produce candidate interlinear glosses au.tomatically. These glosses tend to use a limited set of labels, such as the Leipzig Glossing Rules (Comrie et al., 2008). Where words occur with.out a gloss in the corpus either because a linguist has provided an orthographic transcription but no gloss, or because the orthographic transcription was automatically generated a gloss could be pro.posed automatically. Most straightforwardly, this could be done by re-using a previously existing gloss for that word, if the word was already glossed in another con.text. Where multiple pre-existing glosses occur for the same surface form, it would be possible to contextually resolve these homographs (Mazovet.skiy et al., 2018), but it may be preferable to high.light them for a linguist to resolve. Surfacing these cases to a linguist may even bring up an annotation quality problem that can be .xed (if, in fact, there should have been only one gloss for this form). Deriving glosses for new surface forms that have not previously been observed would be sig.ni.cantly harder depending on the target language, although it should be possible with morphologi.cal analyzers (e.g. (Arkhangeskiy et al., 2012)). In polysynthetic languages in particular, develop.ment of such analyzers would be a challenging task; see also (Mager et al., 2018; Littell et al., 2018), but cf. (Haspelmath, 2018) for a caution.ary note on the term polysynthetic. 4.2.6 Automatic Machine Translation (MT) Many language documentation work.ows involve the translation of sentences in the target-language corpus into some other language, such as English, to make the content more broadly accessible. In effect, this creates a parallel corpus which can be used for training automatic machine transla.tion systems, which can in turn be used to pro.pose translation candidates for parts of the corpus that are still lacking these translations: this may be because the linguist did not yet have time to trans.late their transcriptions, or because only machine-generated hypotheses are available for the tran.scriptions (in which case the cascading-error ef.fect typically causes accuracy of translations to be lower). Such candidate translations would still re.quire human post-editing, but for limited-domain applications, machine translations may be suf..ciently accurate to accelerate the annotation pro.cess. Of course, where other parallel corpora ex.ist (e.g. bilingual story books, or religious materi.als like the Bible), these can also be used as train.ing data. In addition, any existing bilingual word lexicons (like dictionaries) can also help in build.ing machine translation systems, as in (Klemen.tiev et al., 2012). Many high-quality open-source machine trans.lation toolkits already exist, e.g. SockEye (Hieber et al., 2017), TensorFlow (Luong et al., 2017), and Moses (Koehn et al., 2007). Phrase-based machine translation still tends to yield better results than neural machine translation (NMT) for small data sets ( ˇ§ Ostling and Tiedemann, 2017), but multilin.gual NMT models seem promising for cases where similar languages exist that do have large amounts of training data (Johnson et al., 2017; Gu et al., 2018). Recent advances even allow the creation of speech-to-translated-text models (Bansal et al., 2018) and the use of existing translations to en.hance ASR quality (Anastasopoulos and Chiang, 2018). 5 Putting structured data and models to work more broadly A toolkit designed to facilitate transcription and annotation efforts can bene.t language workers and language communities beyond just the an.notation output. Structured data sets used in these toolkits are ripe for conversion into formats needed for various other tasks, such as dictionary creation, e.g. Electronic Text Encoding and Inter.change (TEI, 2018), or for dictionary publishing pipelines, as in Yinarlingi (San and Luk, 2018). Exported data could be formatted for import into a range of dictionary/publishing applications such as lexicon apps for mobile devices or ePub for.mat (Gavrilis et al., 2013) for publishing on a wide range of devices such as smartphones, tablets, computers, or e-readers. Automatically generated pronunciations, word de.nitions, part-of-speech information and example sentences could easily be included. For dif.cult work such as automatic lemmatization, the output could be presented in a simple interface for human veri.cation/correction before publication (Liang et al., 2014). For languages to thrive in the digital domain, some technologies are considered essential: a standardized encoding; a standardized orthogra.phy; and some basic digital language resources, such as a corpus and a spell checker (Soria, 2018). If toolkits make it easy to create structured data sets and models for these languages, then these re.sources can be applied outside language documen.tation and research .elds. For example, Australia has a vibrant community-owned Indigenous media broad.casting sector. For these users, there is potential to re-use the ASR models to generate closed cap.tions (subtitles) for the broadcast material. ASR transcription and translation technologies could be used to enrich the output of these Indigenous community media broadcasters, which would yield a signi.cant improvement in the accessibil.ity of broadcast content. Another option would be to facilitate the creation of smartphone keyboards with predictive text in the target languages, using toolkits like Keyman (SIL). Language archives like PARADISEC could also bene.t by applying these models, once created, on previously existing content for the same language that may have been contributed by other linguists, or that may have come in through other avenues. It may even be possible for these archives to of.fer web-based services to language communities, e.g. for using machine translation models for a given language in a web-based interface. Linguists could archive their models alongside their corpus; for some collections, the published models may inherit the same access permissions as the train.ing data used in their creation, while some models may be able to be published under less restrictive conditions. 5.1 Data Set Availability In general, to support the development of language technologies like the ones we described earlier, it is critical that software engineers are aware of, and have access to data sets re.ecting the diver.sity of endangered languages. Already, data sets are available for a range of languages, and in for.mats suitable for ASR, TTS and other tasks on the Open Speech and Language Resources web.site (Povey, 2018). The addition of ML-ready data sets for more endangered languages would enable software engineers, whose primary concern may not be the language documentation process, to be involved in developing and re.ning speech tools and algorithms. However, access protocols and licenses in place for existing data sets can pro.hibit experimental development. Recording cor.pora speci.cally for the purposes of enabling ML experiments would avoid potentially lengthy ne.gotiations of access rights. 6 Reaching more languages Extending the reach of a toolkit beyond the (typ.ically) few languages which are used when build.ing and testing is critical. Applying technology to more diverse use cases encourages a tool to be.come more robust. With more user cases, a com.munity of support can grow. A community of users, contributors and developers around a toolkit is important to encourage potential participants (Foley, 2015), and reduce the burden of support on individual developers. Being proactive in community discussions to publicize the abilities of tools, providing in-person access to training workshops, publishing online support material and tutorials, and ensuring tools have high-quality documentation for differ.ent levels of users, are all important (albeit labor-intensive) methods of promoting and encouraging language technology to reach more languages. 7 Conclusion Speech and language technology toolkits, de.signed specially for users without backgrounds in speech science, have the potential for signi..cant impact for linguists and language communi.ties globally. Existing toolkits can be enhanced with richer feature sets, and connection with work..ow processes, helping language documentation workers. These toolkits enable language docu.mentation workers to focus on deeper linguistic research questions, by presenting the results of au.tomated systems in ways that let language experts easily verify and correct the hypotheses, yielding annotation speed-ups. At the same time, mak.ing these technologies and the structured data they help produce more widely available would bene.t language communities in many ways. Most of the technologies described here are readily available and easily implemented, while others are still highly experimental in their appli.cation and potential bene.ts for Indigenous lan.guages. With language technology as a whole making rapid progress, and with an increasing amount of dialogue between .eldwork linguists and computer scientists, it is an exciting time to be working on computational methods for language documentation, with many advances that look to be within reach for the near future. Acknowledgments (Acknowledgements omitted in the review copy of this paper.) References Oliver Adams, Trevor Cohn, Graham Neubig, Hilaria Cruz, Steven Bird, and Alexis Michaud. 2018. Eval.uating phonemic transcription of low-resource tonal languages for language documentation. In Proceed.ings of LREC 2018. Antonis Anastasopoulos and David Chiang. 2018. Leveraging translations for speech transcription in low-resource settings. CoRR, abs/1803.08991. Timofey Arkhangeskiy, Oleg Belyaev, and Arseniy Vy.drin. 2012. The creation of large-scale annotated corpora of minority languages using uniparser and the eanc platform. In Proceedings of COLING 2012: Posters, pages 83.92. The COLING 2012 Or.ganizing Committee. Sameer Bansal, Herman Kamper, Karen Livescu, Adam Lopez, and Sharon Goldwater. 2018. Low-resource speech-to-text translation. CoRR, abs/1803.09164. Laurent Besacier, Etienne Barnard, Alexey Karpov, and Tanja Schultz. 2014. Automatic speech recog.nition for under-resourced languages: A survey. Speech Commun., 56:85.100. Brigitte Bigi. 2015. SPPAS: Multi-lingual approaches to the automatic annotation of speech. The Phoneti.cian, 111-112(ISSN:0741-6164):54.69. Paul Boersma and David Weenink. 2001. Praat, a sys.tem for doing phonetics by computer. 5:341.345. Hennie Brugman and Albert Russel. 2004. Annotating multi-media/multi-modal resources with ELAN. In Proceedings of LREC 2004. Kenneth Church, Christopher Cieri, Alejandrina Cristia, Jun Du, Sriram Ganapathy, Mark Liberman, and Neville Ryant. 2018. The First DIHARD Speech Diarization Challenge. https://coml.lscp.ens.fr/dihard/index.html. Bernard Comrie, Martin Haspelmath, and Balthasar Bickel. 2008. The Leipzig glossing rules: Con.ventions for interlinear morpheme-by-morpheme glosses. Chris Culy and Verena Lyding. 2010. Visualizations for exploratory corpus and text analysis. In Proceed.ings of the 2nd International Conference on Corpus Linguistics CILC-10, pages 257.268. Janez Demˇ¦sar. 2006. Statistical comparisons of classi..ers over multiple data sets. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 7:1.30. Aliya Deri and Kevin Knight. 2016. Grapheme-to.phoneme models for (almost) any language. In Pro.ceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Associa.tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), volume 1, pages 399.408. DGA. 2014. TranscriberAG: a tool for seg.menting, labeling and transcribing speech. http://transag.sourceforge.net. Ewan Dunbar, Xuan-Nga Cao, Juan Benjumea, Julien Karadayi, Mathieu Bernard, Laurent Besacier, Xavier Anguera, and Emmanuel Dupoux. 2017. The zero resource speech challenge 2017. CoRR, abs/1712.04313. Gautier Durantin, Ben Foley, Nicholas Evans, and Janet Wiles. 2017. Transcription survey. Daan van Esch and Richard Sproat. 2017. An ex.panded taxonomy of semiotic classes for text nor.malization. In Proceedings of Interspeech 2017. Dominique Estival, Steve Cassidy, Felicity Cox, and Denis Burnham. 2014. Austalk: an audio-visual corpus of australian english. In Proceedings of LREC 2014. Ben Foley. 2015. Angkety map digital resource report. Technical report. Ben Foley, Josh Arnold, Rolando Coto-Solano, Gau.tier Durantin, T. Mark Ellison, Daan van Esch, Scott Heath, Frantiek Kratochvl, Zara Maxwell-Smith, David Nash, Ola Olsson, Mark Richards, Nay San, Hywel Stoakes, Nick Thieberger, and Janet Wiles. 2018. Building Speech Recognition Systems for Language Documentation: The CoEDL Endangered Language Pipeline and Inference System. In Pro.ceedings of the 6th International Workshop on Spo.ken Language Technologies for Under-resourced Languages (SLTU 2018). Dimitris Gavrilis, Stavros Angelis, and Ioannis Tsou.los. 2013. Building interactive books using EPUB and HTML5. In Ambient Media and Systems, pages 31.40, Cham. Springer International Publishing. Javier Gonzalez-Dominguez, Ignacio Lopez-Moreno, and Hasim Sak. 2014. Automatic language identi..cation using long short-term memory recurrent neu.ral networks. In Proceedings of Interspeech 2014. Kyle Gorman and Richard Sproat. 2016. Minimally su.pervised number normalization. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 4:507. 519. Jiatao Gu, Hany Hassan, Jacob Devlin, and Victor O.K. Li. 2018. Universal neural machine translation for extremely low resource languages. In Proceed.ings of the 2018 Conference of the North Ameri.can Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Vol.ume 1 (Long Papers), pages 344.354. Association for Computational Linguistics. Martin Haspelmath. 2018. The last word on polysyn.thesis: A review article. 22:307.326. Felix Hieber, Tobias Domhan, Michael Denkowski, David Vilar, Artem Sokolov, Ann Clifton, and Matt Post. 2017. Sockeye: A toolkit for neural machine translation. CoRR, abs/1712.05690. Martin Jansche. 2014. Computer-aided quality assur.ance of an icelandic pronunciation dictionary. In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LRECˇŻ14), Reykjavik, Iceland. European Language Resources Association (ELRA). Melvin Johnson, Mike Schuster, Quoc V. Le, Maxim Krikun, Yonghui Wu, Zhifeng Chen, Nikhil Thorat, Fernanda Vi.egas, Martin Wattenberg, Greg Corrado, Macduff Hughes, and Jeffrey Dean. 2017. GoogleˇŻs multilingual neural machine translation system: En.abling zero-shot translation. Transactions of the As.sociation for Computational Linguistics, 5:339.351. Alexandre Klementiev, Ann Irvine, Chris Callison-Burch, and David Yarowsky. 2012. Toward statisti.cal machine translation without parallel corpora. In Proceedings of the 13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin.guistics, EACL ˇŻ12, pages 130.140, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Computational Linguis.tics. Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris Callison-Burch, Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi, Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen, Christine Moran, Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexandra Constantin, and Evan Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit for statistical machine translation. In The Annual Conference of the Association for Com.putational Linguistics. Thomas Krause and Amir Zeldes. 2016. Annis3: A new architecture for generic corpus query and vi.sualization. Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, 31(1):118.139. Centre of Excellence for the Dynamics of Language. 2018. Sydney Speaks Project. http://www.dynamicso.anguage.edu.au/sydney.speaks. Y Liang, K Iwano, and Koichi Shinoda. 2014. Simple gesture-based error correction interface for smart.phone speech recognition. pages 1194.1198. Patrick Littell, Anna Kazantseva, Roland Kuhn, Aidan Pine, Antti Arppe, Christopher Cox, and Marie-Odile Junker. 2018. Indigenous language technolo.gies in canada: Assessment, challenges, and suc.cesses. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages 2620.2632. Association for Computational Linguis.tics. Philipos C. Loizou. 2013. Speech Enhancement: The.ory and Practice, 2nd edition. CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, FL, USA. Minh-Thang Luong, Eugene Brevdo, and Rui Zhao. 2017. Neural machine translation (seq2seq) tutorial. https://github.com/tensor.ow/nmt. Manuel Mager, Ximena Gutierrez-Vasques, Gerardo Sierra, and Ivan Meza. 2018. Challenges of lan.guage technologies for the indigenous languages of the Americas. Gleb Mazovetskiy, Kyle Gorman, and Vitaly Nikolaev. 2018. Improving homograph disambiguation with supervised machine learning. In LREC. Alexis Michaud, Oliver Adams, Trevor Anthony Cohn, Graham Neubig, and Sverine Guillaume. 2018. In.tegrating automatic transcription into the language documentation work.ow: Experiments with Na data and the Persephone toolkit. ˇ§ Robert Ostling and Jˇ§org Tiedemann. 2017. Neural ma.chine translation for low-resource languages. CoRR, abs/1708.05729. Slav Petrov, Dipanjan Das, and Ryan McDonald. 2012. A universal part-of-speech tagset. In Proceed.ings of the Eight International Conference on Lan.guage Resources and Evaluation (LRECˇŻ12), Istan.bul, Turkey. European Language Resources Associ.ation (ELRA). Dan Povey. 2018. Open speech and language re.sources. http://www.openslr.org. The Language Archive Max Planck Institute for Psy.cholinguistics. ELAN. https://tla.mpi.nl/tools/tla.tools/elan/. J. Ramirez, J. M., and J. C. 2007. Voice activity de.tection. fundamentals and speech recognition system robustness. In Robust Speech Recognition and Un.derstanding. I-Tech Education and Publishing. Erich R. Round. 2017. The AusPhon-Lexicon project: Two million normalized segments across 300 Aus.tralian languages. Nay San and E Luk. 2018. Yinarlingi: An R package for testing Warlpiri lexicon data. https://github.com/CoEDL/yinarlingi. SIL. Keyman: Type to the world in your language. https://keyman.com/. Claudia Soria. 2018. Digital Language Sur.vival Kit. http://www.dldp.eu/en/content/digital.language-survival-kit. TEI. 2018. Guidelines for electronic text encoding and interchange. http://www.tei-c.org/P5/. Nick Thieberger. 2016. Language documen.tation tools and methods summit report. https://docs.google.com/document/d/1p2EZufVIm2fOQy4aIZ100jnZjfcuG.Bb9YKiXMggDRQ. Shubham Toshniwal, Tara N. Sainath, Ron J. Weiss, Bo Li, Pedro J. Moreno, Eugene Weinstein, and Kanishka Rao. 2018. Multilingual speech recog.nition with a single end-to-end model. 2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 4904.4908. Sami Virpioja, Peter Smit, Stig-Arne Grnroos, and Mikko Kurimo. 2013. Morfessor 2.0: Python Imple.mentation and Extensions for Morfessor Baseline. Technical report. Martijn Wieling and John Nerbonne. 2015. Advances in dialectometry. Annual Review of Linguistics, 1(1):243.264. John Wiseman. 2016. Python interface to the WebRTC Voice Activity Detector. https://github.com/wiseman/py-webrtcvad. 