Building Speech Recognition Systems for Language Documentation: The CoEDL Endangered Language Pipeline and Inference System (ELPIS) Ben Foley19, Josh Arnold19, Rolando Coto-Solano29, Gautier Durantin19, T. Mark Ellison39, Daan van Esch4, Scott Heath19, Franti.ek Kratochv¨Şl5, Zara Maxwell-Smith39, David Nash39, Ola Olsson19, Mark Richards69, Nay San39, Hywel Stoakes789, Nick Thieberger79, Janet Wiles19 1 The University of Queensland, Australia 2 Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand 3 Australian National University, Australia 4 Google, Mountain View (CA), USA 5 Palack. University, Czech Republic 6 Western Sydney University, Australia 7 The University of Melbourne, Australia 8 The University of Auckland, New Zealand 9 ARC Centre of Excellence for the Dynamics of Language (CoEDL), Australia b.foley@uq.edu.au, j.arnold4@uq.edu.au, rolando.coto@vuw.ac.nz, g.durantin@uq.edu.au, m.ellison@anu.edu.au, dvanesch@google.com, scott.heath@uq.edu.au, frantisek.kratochvil@upol.cz, zara.maxwell-smith@anu.edu.au, david.nash@anu.edu.au, o.olsson@uq.edu.au, m.richards@westernsydney.edu.au, nay.san@anu.edu.au, h.stoakes@auckland.ac.nz, thien@unimelb.edu.au, j.wiles@uq.edu.au Abstract Machine learning has revolutionised speech technologies for major world languages, but these technologies have generally not been available for the roughly 4,000 lan.guages with populations of fewer than 10,000 speak.ers. This paper describes the development of ELPIS, a pipeline which language documentation workers with minimal computational experience can use to build their own speech recognition models, resulting in models be.ing built for 16 languages from the Asia-Pacific region. ELPIS puts machine learning speech technologies within reach of people working with languages with scarce data, in a scalable way. This is impactful since it enables lan.guage communities to cross the digital divide, and speeds up language documentation. Complete automation of the process is not feasible for languages with small quan.tities of data and potentially large vocabularies. Hence our goal is not full automation, but rather to make a practical and effective workflow that integrates machine learning technologies. Index Terms: speech recognition, language documen.tation, low-resource languages, linguistic fieldwork, ma.chine learning 1. Introduction While approximately 100 languages globally have ac.cess to commercial speech technologies such as GoogleˇŻs speech-recognition systems [1], the benefits of making speech tools accessible for more languages would be sig.nificant for language speakers and the broader language-research community. Extending the coverage of auto.matic speech recognition (ASR) systems to languages with speaker-bases which have traditionally been too small to access these technologies can help assist their first-language communication on modern devices like smartphones, boosting language status and contributing to ongoing language use. In addition, access to ASR tools for more languages would enable the use of much big.ger data sets in language documentation by speeding up transcription, radically increasing transcription produc.tivity throughput by pre-filling with results of machine learning processes [2]. In this paper, we focus on building ASR systems for the language documentation use case, although the sys.tems we built should also be usable by language commu.nities at large. We will describe the context for this work, with a brief introduction to the challenge of transcription for language documentation. Then, we will describe how we implemented a pipeline to accelerate the transcrip.tion process, and show ASR results across a range of low-resource languages for which no ASR systems have ever been trained. Our pipeline can easily be used to transcribe fieldwork recordings from any language, with ingestion support for all major fieldwork transcription tools, and is accessible to linguists without a machine learning background. 2. Background 2.1. Transcription bottleneck Fieldworkers working on language documentation projects frequently collect hundreds of hours of speech recordings, and often work on low-resource languages: they may even work on languages that have never been recorded before [3] [4] [5]. The process of transcribing this speech data collected in the field is laborious. In a 2017 survey of 51 linguists, Durantin [6] found that one minute of data takes 40 minutes to transcribe on average, with a long tail of lengthier times for difficult transcriptions. As a result, manual transcription is a major bottleneck for language workers wanting to work with the written form of these low-resource languages, either for new lan.guage documentation, or when working through archives of existing recordings. This bottleneck prevents many linguists from working with more than a small fraction of their corpora each year. In addition, the slow pro.cess of manual transcription strangles the use of existing collections of language material in archives such as PAR.ADISEC [7] and AIATSIS [8], containing approximately 8,300 and 40,000 hours of speech data respectively, from being used in language resource production, e.g. the cre.ation of dictionaries or reference grammars. 2.2. Existing technologies Machine Learning (ML) technologies are available for some languages through commercial ASR systems. For example, Google currently provides a cloud system for 119 language varieties through its Cloud Speech-to-Text API. For languages already serviced by Google, Amazon, IBM, Nuance, Microsoft or other commercial providers, these are viable technologies which language workers can readily use for speeding up transcription, with minimal technical knowledge required. In addition, open-source technologies are available to train models for individual languages, using technologies such as the Kaldi speech recognition toolkit [9]. However, implementing or using these systems requires significant technical experience. Our work focussed on bringing open-source ASR tech.nologies within reach of language workers who may not have the technical experience required to either set up or operate bespoke systems. 3. Our solution: the ELPIS pipeline To make it easy for language documentation workers to build turn-key models for speech recognition in any language they work on, we have built ELPIS (the En.dangered Language Pipeline and Inference System), a pipeline of tools which enable people with minimal tech.nical knowledge to train ASR models on an existing tran.scribed subset from a set of fieldwork recordings, and to apply the resulting system to obtain a first-pass tran.scription on untranscribed recordings. This is, to our knowledge, the first project to ex.plore the use of ASR systems for language documenta.tion across a wide range of languages. We believe that one of the main reasons this type of work had not been done before is that unfortunately, it remains relatively rare for language documentation fieldworkers, computa.tional linguists, software engineers and machine learning researchers to interact. We organised a number of work.shops bringing these groups together. 4. Our first workshop: Start of technical development In the first workshop, hosted by the ARC Centre of Excel.lence for the Dynamics of Language (CoEDL), we started developing the ELPIS pipeline. Participants worked in four groups, with differing goals: . Set up the Kaldi open-source ASR system . Organise and select appropriate data from corpora of fieldwork recordings . Clean and normalise the selected input data . Develop pronunciation rules for Kaldi to use in training the models 4.1. Data standardisation One key challenge we encountered in this workshop was data standardisation. Language documentation workers use various types of recording devices, and store their cor.pora in a variety of formats. We built a pipeline for stan.dardizing these recordings, which resamples audio files to a consistent sample rate, bit rate and codec (44.1kHz, 16bit, WAV). In addition, our ingestion pipeline allows the conversion of any existing transcriptions from the three input formats typically used in a linguistˇŻs work.flow (ELAN [10] [11], PRAAT [12], Transcriber [13]) into a JSON interchange format. The transcriptions that lin.guists create from field recordings are commonly time-aligned, allowing for easy separation of long audio files into their component utterances. After conversion, the interchange format contains all the content which Kaldi expects, and even includes other data from the input files that are not relevant to Kaldi, making this standardised format useful and usable in other language resource pro.duction workflows. 4.2. Data normalisation Once the audio has been converted and the standardised JSON file has been created with time-aligned transcrip.tions, normalisation scripts process the text for language model training. Our system removes punctuation, non-orthographic word forms (e.g. comments marked with ˇ±#ˇ±), and English words (using the NLTK toolkit [14]), while also lowercasing the text. Further scripts derive a vocabulary list and create the pronunciation lexicon based on a supplied set of manually specified grapheme-to-phoneme (G2P) mappings. Our set-up currently uses a single normalisation mod.ule for stripping out non-linguistic content from the tran.scriptions, while the G2P mappings were created indi.vidually by each linguist for their own language data. As the languages we worked on typically had transpar.ent orthographies, this was a relatively straightforward task. We did not handle verbalization of numbers and other not-a-word tokens, since these rarely occurred in the data. Where they did, our tool skipped the utter.ance. 4.3. Train/test split Finally, we also applied a test-train split with 90% of au.dio recordings and transcriptions assigned to the train set, while 10% was held out for testing. We should note that there is typically some overlap in vocabulary and even in speakers. For our purposes, this is accept.able, as it reflects the target use case: the audio cor.pora are typically limited to a relatively small speaker population, as language documentation fieldworkers usu.ally work closely with a small group of speakers, and the goal is chiefly to transcribe the untranscribed field.work recordings, which also include the same speakers observed in the train set. Once this split has been cre.ated, a script prepares the Kaldi workspace by moving files into the locations which Kaldi expects. By the end of this workshop, preliminary results were obtained for Abui (ISO 639: abz; about 17,000 speakers in Indone.sia) and Komnzo (no ISO 639 code assigned; about 200 speakers in Papua New Guinea). 5. Containerisation Following the first workshop, Nay San migrated the pipeline to Docker, a software containerisation platform [15], with the intention of reducing the complexity of set.ting up Kaldi. Having the pipeline available in a Docker image reduced the install time of Kaldi from the two days experienced in the first workshop down to half an hour in the second. ˇŻGo-taskˇŻ task runners were used as a simple way to invoke collections of scripts. For exam.ple, the manual way of cleaning data for Kaldi requires the language worker to batch convert audio files; check and clean individual transcription files; construct a list of unique words in the corpus; build a pronunciation model representing every word in the corpus and then move files into the correct folders. The potential for human error in this workflow is very high. Instead, these steps, au.tomated by Python scripts, can be grouped by a single task runner command, and invoked by a single command ˇŻtask run-elanˇŻ. 6. Our second workshop: Scaling to more languages During the 2018 workshop, engineers and linguists, with a range of computational experience, ran the ELPIS sys.tem on their own language data. Following a morning of introductory talks relating to ASR and ML tools in.cluding the closely related Persephone system [16], the group participated in a workshop on data management and basic methods of running scripts. After practising with a dummy corpus to gain some experience operating the pipeline, the linguists then processed their own data. During the following week, some of the linguists tuned their systemˇŻs parameters to try and reduce er.ror rates, and by the time we hosted a follow-up session at the end of the week, linguists had trained language models for 12 languages, with varying error rates. We attribute this variation to a number of factors: . Differences in quality and quantity of audio data . Differences in the nature of the fieldwork record.ings, e.g. single-word elicitation vs. sentences (longer units, e.g. stories, were broken down into sentences using time alignments) . Differences in the degree of tuning which was done on individual languages (e.g. in the pronunciation model) . Morphological complexity and or orthographic conventions of some of the target languages, where a bigger inflected word inventory leads to higher OOV rates (similar to effects observed in [17]). Subword language models would help with this, but our current pipeline does not support training such models yet. Table 1 shows the Word Error Rates (WER) for some of the languages we worked on. Although training data sizes are relatively small, the vocabulary for some of these data sets is limited, as is the set of speakers, meaning that some of the WER re.sults our systems achieve are still reasonably decent. Cer.tainly, all transcriptions still require human post-editing, but their presence helps accelerate the transcription pro.cess, meaning more training data can be created, after which the system can be retrained in order to achieve quality improvements. In particular, linguists found vi.sualizing the output using lattices quite informative to understand the underlying mechanisms at work, and no.ticed that even when the top hypothesis was wrong, they could frequently find the right words in the lattice, sug.gesting it would be possible to make use of lattices in the transcription workflow. Figure 1 shows a sample lattice for the Abui language we worked on. Linguists continued to train systems for new lan.guages following the workshop, with the total now reach.ing 16. 7. Next steps Following these workshops, our work has focussed on making the code more robust and building a simple user interface to the code on a hosted server. In the near fu.ture, our plans for further extending the pipeline include: . Showing the modelˇŻs lattices for the language worker to ˇŻoverrideˇŻ the automatic transcription . Enabling the generation of visualisations of the lan.guage data . Supporting output of inferences in ELAN format . Releasing the code and documentation on GitHub 7.1. Lattices and visualisation Viewing the modelˇŻs lattices gave the linguists great in.sight into the mechanics of the training process during the 2018 workshop. Having the means to select alter.nate paths in the lattice to influence the model will be an intuitive way to understand the model, and to cor.rect transcription errors. Similarly, visualising statistics about the language data (e.g. the number of utterances, the signal-to-noise ratio in the audio, and more) would help provide insight into model behavior and accuracy. 7.2. Output into ELAN format Our pipeline already enables linguists to ingest transcrip.tion files from common linguistic tools, making thep.ipeline highly accessible. Outputting the inference tran.scriptions to a popular format . time-aligned and expos.ing the confidence of the transcription . wil enable the pipeline to be used in linguistsˇŻ workflows without the burden of learning yet-another piece of software. Language  ISO 639  Processed by  LM n-gram order  Training data  WER  Abui  abz  Durantin  3  2 hours  13.3*  Arrernte  aer  Stoakes  1  < 1 hour  73.4  Bininj Kunwok  gup  Ellison, Marley  1  17 min (narrative, single speaker)  48.1  Bininj Kunwok  gup  Stoakes  1  < 1 hour (word list, 3 speakers)  80.5  Cook Islands Maori  rar  Coto-Solano  3  < 1 hour  37.1  Ende  kit  Ellison  1  11 min  52.9  Indonesian  ind  Maxwell-Smith  3  < 1 hour  48.3  Mangarrayi  mpc  Richards  1  < 1 hour  61.9  Nafsan  erk  Thieberger  3  3 hours  42.7  Warlpiri  wbp  Nash  1  < 1 hour  39.0  Table 1: Word Error Rates (WERs) for some of the languages we worked on in the second workshop, using a 90/10 train/test split as described above, except for Abui which used a 125/10 train/test split. Figure 1: Lattice for one of the utterances in our Abui corpus. 7.3. Longer-term plans In general, we found that the majority of linguists in the workshop groups were able to operate the scripts with minimal training. However, some participants found sys.tem path structures difficult to understand, and were un.able to use the pipeline. Others had difficulty in getting Docker to install, due to dated operating systems, or lack of administration permissions for their computers. If we could set up a hosted server to run the pipeline, this might resolve these issues, enabling even more people to use the system. 8. Conclusion Providing ways for users with minimal technical knowl.edge to access ASR tools makes a big impact to the reach of these systems into communities who would otherwise not have the opportunity to apply cutting-edge tools to their languages. Our current work has seen exciting ini.tial results for 16 languages from the Asia-Pacific re.gion, enabling linguists with some technical knowledge to train models to obtain usable first-pass transcriptions of their data. With further development, the ELPIS system should become usable by language workers without any technical knowledge. We hope ELPIS will provide new tools for linguists and communities to document, pre.serve and future-proof many of the worldˇŻs endangered languages. 9. References [1] Google Cloud Speech-to-Text API lan.guage support. Google. [Online]. Avail.able: https://cloud.google.com/speech-to.text/docs/languages [2] L. M. Johnson, M. D. Paolo, and A. Bell, ˇ°Forced alignment for understudied language varieties: Testing Prosodylab-Aligner with Tongan data.ˇ± Language Docu.mentation & Conservation, vol. 12, pp. 80.123, 2018. [3] N. Evans, Dying Words: Endangered Languages and What They Have to Tell Us. Wiley-Blackwell, 2011. [4] F. Meakins, J. Green, and M. Turpin, UnderstandingLinguistic Fieldwork. Routledge, 2018. [5] M. Carew, J. Green, I. Kral, R. Nordlinger, and R. Singer, ˇ°Getting in touch: Language and digital in.clusion in Australian Indigenous communities,ˇ± vol. 9, pp. 307.323, 2015. [6] G. Durantin, B. Foley, N. Evans, and J. Wiles, ˇ°Tran.scription survey,ˇ± 2017. [7] Pacific and Regional Archive for Digital Sources in En.dangered Cultures (PARADISEC). [Online]. Available: http://www.paradisec.org.au [8] Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies (AIATSIS). [Online]. Available: https://aiatsis.gov.au [9] D. Povey, A. Ghoshal, G. Boulianne, L. Burget, O. Glem.bek, N. Goel, M. Hannemann, P. Motl¨Ş.ek, Y. Qian, P. Schwarz, J. Silovsk., G. Stemmer, and K. Vesel., ˇ°The Kaldi speech recognition toolkit,ˇ± in IEEE 2011 Workshop on Automatic Speech Recognition and Under.standing. IEEE Signal Processing Society, Dec. 2011, iEEE Catalog No.: CFP11SRW-USB. [10] T. L. A. Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics.ELAN. Nijmegen, The Netherlands. [Online]. Available:https://tla.mpi.nl/tools/tla-tools/elan/ [11] H. Brugman and A. Russel, ˇ°Annotating multi-media/multi-modal resources with ELAN,ˇ± in LREC, 2004. [12] P. Boersma and D. Weenink, ˇ°Praat, a system for doing phonetics by computer,ˇ± vol. 5, pp. 341.345, 01 2001. [13] TranscriberAG: a tool for segmenting, label.ing and transcribing speech. [Online]. Available: http://transag.sourceforge.net [14] E. Loper and S. Bird, ˇ°NLTK: the natural languagetoolkit,ˇ± CoRR, vol. cs.CL/0205028, 2002. [Online].Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs.CL/0205028 [15] Docker container software. [Online]. Available: http://transag.sourceforge.net [16] O. Adams, T. Cohn, G. Neubig, H. Cruz, S. Bird, and A. Michaud, ˇ°Evaluation phonemic transcription of low-resource tonal languages for language documentation,ˇ± in Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018), N. Calzolari, K. Choukri, C. Cieri, T. Declerck, S. Goggi,K. Hasida, H. Isahara, B. Maegaard, J. Mariani, H. Mazo,A. Moreno, J. Odijk, S. Piperidis, and T. Tokunaga, Eds.Paris, France: European Language Resources Associa.tion (ELRA), May 2018. [17] R. Cotterell, S. J. Mielke, J. Eisner, and B. Roark, ˇ°Are all languages equally hard to language-model?ˇ± in Pro.ceedings of the 2018 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for ComputationalLinguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers), June 2018. 